# Introducing the New Marvel Studios Logo

Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige talks about the creation of Marvel Studios' new logo & first fanfare!

Posted Nov 12, 2013 3:47 pm

Updated Nov 12, 2013 7:55 pm

By Marc Strom

Fans who saw Marvel’s “Thor: The Dark World” this past weekend experienced something a bit different just before the film began, as the traditional Marvel Studios logo morphed into its next generation, complete with the studio’s very first official fanfare!

Now you can see it up close right here on Marvel.com directly below, and we spoke with Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige about what made this the right time for a new logo, Brian Tyler’s musical fanfare and more immediately beneath the video!

“We designed the very first Marvel logo for the first Spider-Man film,” remembers Feige. “We’ve used that logo for eleven years, and with ‘Thor: The Dark World,’ it felt like a good time to update it because this is the very first film that only has the Marvel logo in front of it. You look back at the other films, and they’ve also featured our studio partners’ or distribution partners’ logos. But now that we are our own entity within the Walt Disney Company, it is only the Marvel logo in front of the movies. So that felt like the time to update it and have something that is more substantial as a standalone logo in front of our features.”

The new logo will appear in front of all of Marvel’s films as well as “Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.” But in creating the new logo, Feige didn’t want to break too much from the one fans have grown to know and love.

“The key was, we really loved that old flip logo,” the Producer remarks. “We didn’t want to re-invent the wheel, but we wanted it to feel bigger, to feel more substantial, which is why it starts with the flip, but suddenly it’s more dimensional as we go through the lettering and it reveals itself with the metallic sheen before settling into the white-on-red, well known Marvel logo, with the added flourish of the arrival and the announcement of the Studios at the bottom of the word Marvel.”

For the very first time, Marvel Studios now has its very own fanfare as well, something that helped make the new logo feel more substantial.

“My favorite part of it is, like all great studio logos, you need a fanfare, and we’d never had that before,” adds Feige. “We sometimes started the score of the movie, sometimes just had sound effects over it, sometimes had a song over it that leads into the beginning of the movie. So this is the first time that we have an actual, wonderful fanfare to accompany our logo. We turned to Brian Tyler to compose it for us, who this year has done two movies for us and two of what I believe to be two of the best scores in any Marvel Studios film, for ‘Iron Man 3’ and ‘Thor: The Dark World.’ So he thankfully was willing to and happy to create a spectacular standalone fanfare for us.”

See the new Marvel logo for yourself on the big screen in front of “Thor: The Dark World,” now in theaters and IMAX 3D, and keep your eyes on Marvel.com for the latest on Marvel Studios films!
