# FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022: Base camps and training centres ready for 32 teams

QNA/Doha

*** The teams' camps consist of four-star and five-star hotels, villas, resorts, and non-hotel accommodations**

With just under a month left before the World Cup Qatar 2022, the country is filled with signs of the tournament everywhere, and everything seems to be approaching zero hour for the 22nd edition of the FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022. The mega event kicks off on November 20 and will continue till December 18.

 All arrangements and preparations for receiving the 32 teams are ready, especially since the first team to arrive will be on November 7. It will be the Japanese team that arrives first.

 The teams' camps consist of four-star and five-star hotels, villas, resorts, and non-hotel accommodations, such as sports academies buildings, school dormitories and university residences, in addition to other facilities such as treatment rooms.

 All these places are distinguished by their ability to protect the privacy of the teams and were provided with all the necessary safety protocols.

 As for the training centres distributed throughout the country, some of them were renovated and others were built to the highest standards. Their proximity to the teams' base were also taken into account.

 The Qatari team, which won the 2019 Asian Cup for the first time in its history, and is playing in group A, chose the Al Azizia Hotel, located in the Aspire Zone, as its base camp. The team led by Spain's Felix Sanchez will train at Training Ground No. 3 in Aspire Zone.

 Al Moez Ali and Akram Afif's teammates play against Ecuador on November 20 at the Al Bayt Stadium. They will have to play against Senegal (African Champions 2021) in the second match on November 25, at Al Thumama Stadium and then finish the group stage by meeting the Netherlands on November 29, at Al Bayt Stadium.

 As for the Ecuador team, it chose the Hyatt Regency Oryx Hotel near Hamad International Airport. It will train at the Messemer Sports Club, while the Senegal team chose the Al Duhail Sports Hall Hotel as its base camp.

 The teammates of Bayern Munich star Sadio Mane are training at Al-Duhail stadium's No. 2.

 The Senegal team is led by coach Aliou Cisse, who has been in charge since March 4, 2015, after his appointment to succeed the French Alain Giresse.

 The Senegal team will play their first match in the first round on November 21 against the Netherlands at the Al Thumama Stadium. It will meet the Qatar national team on November 25 at the Al Thumama Stadium and conclude its group matches against Ecuador on November 29 at the Khalifa International Stadium.

 Meanwhile, the Netherlands national team, will stay at The St. Regis Doha in the West Bay, and will train at Qatar University stadium No. 6. The team, led by veteran Dutch coach Louis van Gaal, since August 4, 2021, will start its World Cup journey playing Senegal on November 21 at Al Thumama Stadium, while its second match will be against Ecuador on November 25 at the Khalifa International Stadium, before they meet the Qatari national team on November 29, 2022, at Al Bayt Stadium.

 The Group B includes England, Iran, the US and Wales.

 The England team, which participated in 15 previous editions, and is preparing for its 16th participation in the 22nd edition, will be staying at Souq Al Wakra Hotel.

 The team led by coach Gareth Southgate will train at the Al Wakra Club Stadium. 

 Southgate led England to finish fourth at the 2018 World Cup in Russia, and to the UEFA European Football Championship (Euro 2020) final match.

 The Iranian team will stay at the Al Rayyan Hotel, and will train at Al Rayyan Stadium, while the US team, which is making its 11th appearance in the World Cup finals, chose to stay in the Marsa Malaz Kempinski Hotel, and will train at the Al Gharafa Club Stadium.

 The US team is led by coach Gregg Berhalter, who took over the task on December 2, 2018, and led it to qualify for the 2022 World Cup after winning the 2021 Gold Cup and CONCACAF League Cup in the same year.

 Berhalter will be one of the few who have competed in the World Cup as a player and a coach. He participated as a player in the 2002 and 2006 World Cups.

 The US team begins its matches by playing against Wales on November 21, 2022 at the Ahmed Bin Ali Stadium, before facing England on November 25 at the Al Bayt Stadium in Al Khor. It will conclude the first round by facing Iran on November 29, 2022 at the Al Thumama Stadium.

 The Wales national team chose to stay at the Delta Hotel City Center, located in the diplomatic area, while it will train at the new stadiums of Al Sadd Club.

 In group C of the World Cup, the Argentine team chose Qatar University as its residence, and will train at Qatar University No 3 training site.

 The Argentine national team, which plays its matches in the group stage at Lusail Stadium and 974, is led by coach Lionel Scaloni, who took over the task on August 3, 2018, succeeding his compatriot Jorge Sampaoli.

 Messi's teammates will start their World Cup games by meeting the Saudi team on November 22 at Lusail Stadium, then playing Mexico on November 26 at the same stadium, before concluding the first round against Poland on November 30 at Stadium 974.

 The Saudi team, which is making its second successive appearance and sixth in its history, will stay in the Murwab Resort at Sealine Beach, which is about 57km south of Doha.

 The colleagues of Saleh al-Shehri, Salman al-Faraj and Yasser al-Shahrani will train on the training grounds at Sealine.

 The Saudi national team has been led by French coach Herve Renard, since May 29, 2019. He took over the task, succeeding Argentine Juan Antonio Pizzi.

 Salem al-Dosari's teammates will start the World Cup playing against Argentina on November 22 at Lusail Stadium, before playing with Polish counterpart on November 26 at Education City Stadium. They conclude the group stage playing Mexico on November 30 at Lusail Stadium.

 Mexico's national team has decided to reside he Murwab Resort in the Simaisma area, which is about 45km north of Doha, while it will train at Al Khor Club Stadium,

 As for the Polish national team, they chose to stay at the Ezdan Palace Hotel, located in the Duhail area, while they will train at the Al-Kharaitiyat Club Stadium.

 As for the teams in Group D, the French team has chosen to stay at the Al Messila resort. The team is led by coach Didier Deschamps since July 2012 will train at Al Sadd Club.

 The teammates of Karim Benzema and Kylian Mbappe will start their World Cup campaign against Australia on November 22 at Al Janoub Stadium, before meeting their Danish counterpart on November 26 at Stadium 974. They conclude the matches of this round by meeting Tunisia on November 30 at Education City Stadium.

 Meanwhile, the Australian national team has decided to reside at the new athletes' residences at Aspire Academy, and to train at Aspire Zone stadium No. 5.

 As for the Danish team, it chose to reside in the resort of Retaj Salwa Resort & Spa near Salwa Road. The team led by coach Kasper Hjulmand will train at the stadiums of Al Sailiya SC.

 The Danish team will start its journey in the tournament on November 22, by meeting the Tunisian team at the Education City Stadium. It will then face its French counterpart on November 26 at the 974 Stadium. As for the last match in the first round, it will meet Australia on November 30 at the Al Janoub Stadium.

 The Tunisian team has chosen the Wyndham Grand Doha Hotel West Bay. The team led by Jalal al-Qadri since last February will train at the Al-Uqla training grounds.

 Youssef Msakni's colleagues will start their participation by meeting Denmark on November 22 at the Education City Stadium. They face Australia on November 26 at the Al Janoub Stadium, before meeting world champion France on the November 30 at the Education City Stadium.

 In Group E, Spain, chose to reside at Qatar University. The team, led by coach Luis Enrique since July 9, 2018, will train at stadium No. 1 at Qatar University. The Spanish national team will play its first match against Costa Rica on November 23 at Al Thumama Stadium, before playing Germany at Al Bayt Stadium on November 27. Its group stage will conclude with a match with Japan on December 1, 2022, at the Khalifa International Stadium.

 Costa Rica will stay at the DusitD2 Salwa Hotel, about 20 minutes from Hamad International Airport, and will train at the Al-Ahly Club Stadium.

 Germany chose to reside at the Zulal Resort, located in Al Ruwais, about 110km north of Doha, and he team will train at the Al Shamal Club Stadium.

 As for the Japanese team, it will stay at the Radisson Blu Hotel, which is about 4km from Souq Waqif.

 The team will train at Stadium No. 1 in Al Sadd Club.

 The Japanese team is lead by coach Hajime Moriyasu

 As for group F, the Belgium team chose to stay at the Hilton Salwa Beach Resort and Villas, near Abu Samra, about 90 km south-west of Doha.

 The Salwa training grounds will host the training sessions for the team led by Spanish coach Roberto Martinez since August 3, 2016.

 The teammates of Kevin de Bruyne and Romelu Lukaku will play against Canada on November 24 at the Ahmed bin Ali Stadium. Eden Hazard's team will face Morocco on November 27 at the Al Thumama Stadium. In the third and final game, the team will play against Croatia, on December 1, at the Ahmed bin Ali Stadium.

 As for the Canadian national team, it will stay at Century Premier Hotel at Lusail, while training at the Umm Salal Stadium.

 The Moroccan team chose the Wyndham Doha West Bay hotel as its headquarters. Ashraf Hakimi's colleagues will train at Al Duhail Club Stadium. The Moroccan team is led by Walid Regragui. It will start its first round game against Croatia on November 23 at Al Bayt Stadium, then meet Belgium on November 27 at Al Thumama Stadium, and conclude the first round against Canada on December 1 at the Al Thumama Stadium.

 The Croatian national team chose to stay at the Hilton Doha Hotel in the West Bay region, and will train at the Ersal Complex Training Grounds No. 3.

 In Group G, the Brazilian national team, have chosen to stay at The Westin Doha Hotel in the city centre. The team will train at the Al Arabi Club Stadium.

 Adenor Leonardo Bacchi has been coaching the national team since June 16, 2016. Neymar's teammates will play their first match on November 24, against Serbia at Lusail Stadium before facing Switzerland in the second round on November 28, at Stadium 974. In the third match, they face Cameroon on December 2 at Lusail Stadium.

 As for the Serbia national team, it will stay at the Rixos Gulf Hotel near Hamad International Airport, while training at the Al Arabi Club Stadium.

 The Swiss national football team has chosen the Le Royal Meridien Hotel at Lusail as its base camp and is training at the Qatar University Stadium.

 The Cameroon team will stay at the Banyan Tree Hotel at La Cigale Msheireb, while the training, led by coach Rigobert Song will be at the Al Sailiya Club.

Last updated:  October 21 2022 10:37 PM
