# 10.1057/9780230297784_11

273 10 Genocide in the Americas 

Alfred A. Cave 

Introduction 

Although they often differ sharply on the numbers, scholars without exception now portray the European colonization of the Americas as a monumental, per-haps unprecedented, demographic catastrophe for the continents’ indigenous peoples. Rejecting earlier estimates that held that the New World was sparsely populated in 1492, demographers now provide projections that, in their high-est estimates, sometimes exceed 112,000,000. 1 There is general agreement that, whatever their precise pre-contact numbers, indigenous populations within a century after contact were reduced by 90% or more. There is agreement as well on the prime agent of that decimation: infectious diseases to which native peoples had no immunity. But it is also generally recognized that atrocities against native American peoples committed by the invader–colonizers also con-tributed to their population decline. Did those atrocities constitute genocide? On that question there has been disagreement and controversy. At one extreme stands a group of scholars who argue that genocide on a massive and unprecedented scale was the primary characteristic of the history of colonization in the Americas. Perhaps the most outspoken and controversial member of this group is Ward Churchill. In A Little Matter of Genocide he declared that ‘the American holocaust was and remains unparalleled, both in terms of its magnitude and in terms of the degree to which its ferocity was sustained over time not by one but by several participating groups.’ 2 Elsewhere, Churchill wrote that the perpetrators of genocide against Indians anticipated ‘the behavior and the logic that have come to be associated with Hitler’s SS. They defined their enemy in purely racial terms, they understood war only in terms of the sheer annihilation of the racial enemy, and they engaged in war because of a combination of abstract conceptions of “progress” on the one hand, and a related desire for pure material gain on the other.’ 3

D. Stone (ed.), The Historiography of Genocide 

© Palgrave Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited 2008 Another notable spokesman of this school is David E. Stannard. In his 

American Holocaust , Stannard took issue with those who refuse to call ‘the near-total destruction of the Western Hemisphere’s native people’ genocide, on the grounds that it was primarily the ‘inadvertent’ but ‘inevitable’ result of epidemic disease. ‘Although at times operating independently, for most of the long cen-turies of devastation that followed 1492, disease and genocide were interde-pendent forces acting dynamically – whipsawing their victims between plague and violence, each one feeding upon the other, and together driving countless numbers of entire ancient societies to the brink – and often over the brink – of total extermination.’ 4 Tzvetan Todorov, in The Conquest of America: The Question of the Other , found substantial support for that view in the writings of a number of contemporary historians of the Spanish invasion of the Americas, among them Fr. Toribio Motolinia, a priest not particularly sympathetic to Indians or their culture. Motolinia described ‘ten plagues’ which decimated the indigenous population. Only two were outbreaks of infectious disease. The others were deliberate acts of abuse and murder perpetrated by the Spanish, and included famine induced by the destruction of crops, systematic beating, starvation and overwork of enslaved Indian labourers in fields and mines, and in numerous instances, indiscriminate sadistic killing, including the widespread practice of tossing Indian babies to ravenous dogs. Motolinia’s account, dating from 1534, is but one of many hundreds of contemporary records of the genocidal behav-iour of conquistadores and colonists occurring in virtually every area of the American continents and extending over several centuries. Todorov, who declared the genocide in the Americas unsurpassed in its scope, dedicated his book to ‘the memory of a Mayan woman devoured by dogs’. 5Despite the evidence of extensive abuse of indigenous peoples by colonizers, some writers have denied the validity of the concept of genocide to the under-standing of the colonization of America. Historian James Axtell, to cite a leading example, has declared that ‘genocide ... is historically inaccurate as a description of the vast majority of encounters between Europeans and Indians. Certainly no European colonial government ever tried to exterminate all Indians as Indians, as a race, and you can count on one hand the authorized colonial attempts to anni-hilate even single tribes ... [T]he vast majority of settlers had no interest in killing Indians – who were much too valuable for trade and labor – and those who did took careful aim at temporary political or military enemies.’ Axtell concludes that descendents of the colonizers need not feel any particular sense of ‘moral onus’ surrounding the deeds of their forbearers. While recognizing that some colonists did some very bad things, he assures his readers that ‘only the rare, certifiable, homicidal maniac sought to commit “genocide” against the Indians.’ 6Others have agreed with Axtell in challenging the use of the terms ‘genocide’ and ‘holocaust’ as descriptive of the encounters of Europeans and Native Americans. Some scholars of the Nazi Holocaust in particular have argued that 274 Genocide in the Americas
