# How Humans Evolved

1 volume (various pagings) : 28 cm +

How Humans Evolved remains the most up-to-date, forward-looking book in physical anthropology. Through a unique and balanced blend of evolutionary theory, population genetics, and behavioral ecology, the authors move beyond merely describing anthropological finds to showing students the big picture about how humans lived in the past and why they have evolved into the people they are today

System requirements for accompanying CD-ROM: Windows, Windows 9X, Windows NT. 2000/XP, or later

Includes bibliographical references and index

pt. 1. How evolution works -- 1. Adaptation by natural selection -- Explaining adaptation before Darwin -- Darwin's theory of adaptation -- Darwin's postulates -- An example of adaptation by natural selection -- Reading : studying evolution in Darwin's finches -- Individual selection -- The evolution of complex adaptations -- Why small variations are important -- Why intermediate steps are favored by selection -- Rates of evolutionary change -- Darwin's difficulties explaining variation -- 2. Genetics -- Mendelian genetics -- Cell division and the role of chromosomes in inheritance -- Mitosis and meiosis -- Chromosomes and Mendel's experimental results -- Linkage and recombination -- Box 2.1. More on recombination -- Molecular genetics -- Genes are DNA -- The chemical basis of life -- DNA codes for proteins -- Not all DNA codes for proteins -- Reading : deciphering DNA -- 3. The modern synthesis -- Population genetics -- Genes in populations -- How random mating and sexual reproduction change genotypic frequencies -- Box 3.1. Genotypic frequencies after two generations of random mating -- How natural selection changes gene frequencies -- The modern synthesis -- The genetics of continuous variation -- How variation is maintained -- Reading : DNA is digital -- Natural selection and behavior -- Constraints on adaptation -- Correlated characters -- Disequilibrium -- Genetic drift -- Local versus optimal adaptations -- Other constraints on evolution -- Box 3.2. The geometry of area-volume ratios -- 4. Speciation and phylogeny -- What are species? -- The biological species concept -- The ecological species concept -- The origin of species -- Allopatric speciation -- Parapatric and sympatric speciation -- Reading : evolution is not always so slow -- The tree of life -- Why reconstruct phylogenies? -- Box 4.1. The role of phylogeny in the comparative method -- How to reconstruct phylogenies -- Problems due to convergence -- Problems due to ancestral characters -- Reconstructing phylogenies using genetic distance data -- Box 4.1. Phylogeny reconstruction using genetic distance -- Taxonomy, naming names

pt. 2. Primate ecology and behavior -- 5. Introduction to the primates -- Two reasons to study primates -- Primates are our closest relatives -- Primates are a diverse order -- Features that define the primates -- Box 5.1. What's in a tooth? -- Primate biogeography -- A taxonomy of living primates -- The prosimians -- Reading : orangutan conservation -- The anthropoids -- Primate conservation -- 6. Primate ecology -- The distribution of food -- Reading : monkeys can be picky eaters -- Box 6.1. Dietary adaptations of primates -- Activity patterns -- Ranging behavior -- Predation -- Primate sociality -- Box 6.2. Forms of social groups among primates -- The distribution of females -- Box 6.3. Dominance hierarchies -- The distribution of males -- 7. Primate mating systems -- The language of adaptive explanations -- The evolution of reproductive strategies -- Reproductive strategies of female -- Sources of variation in female reproductive performance -- Reproductive tradeoffs -- Sexual selection and male mating strategies -- Intrasexual selection -- Intersexual selection -- Male reproductive tactics -- Investing males -- Male-male competition in nonmonogamous groups -- Reading : dangers of dispersal -- Infanticide -- Paternal care in nonmonogamous groups -- Female mate choice -- 8. The evolution of social behavior -- Kinds of social interactions -- Altruism : a conundrum -- Kin selection -- Box 8.1. Group selection -- Hamilton's rule -- Evidence of kin selection in primates -- Box 8.2. How relationships are maintained -- Reciprocal altruism -- Reading : how do we study primates? -- 9. Primate intelligence -- What is intelligence? -- Why are primates so smart? -- Hypotheses explaining primate intelligence -- Testing models of the evolution of intelligence -- Knowledge about the ecological and social domains -- The ecological domain -- Social knowledge -- Box 9.1. Examples of deception in nonhuman primates -- Reading : what do chimpanzees think about seeing? -- Theory of mind -- Box 9.2. Examining theory of mid in children, monkeys, and apes -- The great ape problem -- The value of studying primate behavior

pt. 3. The history of the human lineage -- 10. From tree shrew to ape -- Continental drift and climate change -- The methods of paleontology -- The evolution of the early primates -- The first anthropoids -- Box 10.1. Facts that teeth can reveal -- Box 10.2. Missing links -- The emergence of the hominoids -- Reading : the world of the ancient apes -- 11. From hominoid to hominid -- At the beginning -- Ardipithecus ramidus -- Reading : Toumaï, child of a dry season -- Orrorin tugenensis -- The hominid community diversifies -- Australopithecus -- A. anamensis -- A. afarensis -- A. africanus -- A. garhi -- A. habilis/rudolfensis -- Paranthropus -- Box 11.1. Chemical clues about the diet of paranthropines -- Kenyanthropus -- Hominid phylogenies -- The evolution of early hominid morphology and behavior -- The evolution of bipedality -- Early hominid subsistence -- Early hominid social organization -- Reading : walking through time -- 12. Oldowan toolmakers and the origin of human life history -- The Oldowan toolmakers -- Box 12.1. Ancient toolmaking and tool use -- Complex foraging shapes human life history -- Box 12.2. What meat eating favors food sharing -- Evidence for complex foraging by Oldowan toolmakers -- Archaeological evidence for meat eating -- Reading : an Oldowan challenge -- Hunters or scavengers? -- Domestic lives of Oldowan toolmakers -- Back to the future : the transition to modern human life histories -- 13. From hominid to homo -- Hominids of the Lower Pleistocene : Homo ergaster -- Morphology -- Tools and subsistence -- Hominids of the early Middle Pleistocene (900 to 300 kya) -- Box 13.1. Reconstructing ancient climates using deep-sea cores -- Eastern Asia : Homo erectus -- Reading : the story of the first missing link -- Africa and Western Eurasia : Homo heidelbergensis -- Hominids of the later Pleistocene (300 to 50 kya) -- Eastern Eurasia : H. erectus and H. heidelbergensis -- Western Eurasia : the Neanderthals -- Africa : the road to Homo sapiens? -- The sources of change -- The muddle in the middle -- 14. Homo sapiens and the evolution of modern human behavior -- Modern Homo sapiens -- Archaeological evidence for modern human behavior -- Upper Paleolithic technology and culture -- Reading : when lions ruled France -- Origin and spread of modern humans -- Box 14.1. The multiregional hypothesis -- Genetic data -- Box 14.2. Mitochondrial Eve -- Evidence from fossils and tool kits -- Modern human behavior : revolution or evolution? -- The African archaeological record during the Later Pleistocene -- How modern human behavior evolved -- Box 14.3. Arcy-sur-cure and the causes of modern human behavior -- 15. The evolution of language -- Language is an adaptation -- Speech production and perception -- Grammar -- Reading : happily blinkered humans -- Language capacities are derived -- How language evolved -- When language evolved -- Did language arise early? -- Did language arise late?

pt. 4. Evolution and modern humans -- 16. Human genetic diversity -- Explaining human variation -- Variation in traits influenced by single genes -- Causes of genetic variation within groups -- Box 16.1. Calculating gene frequencies for a balanced polymorphism -- Causes of genetic variation among groups -- Variation in complex phenotypic traits -- Genetic variation within groups -- Genetic variation among groups -- The race concept -- Reading : human diversity -- 17. Evolution and the human life cycle -- Maternal-fetal conflict during pregnancy -- Why there is parent-offspring conflict -- Spontaneous abortion -- Blood sugar -- The evolution of senescence -- Two evolutionary theories of senescence -- Evidence foe the theories -- Reading : got milk? -- The evolution of menopause -- Box 17.1. The evolution of menstruation -- 18. Evolution and human behavior -- Why evolution is relevant to human behavior -- Evolutionary psychology -- The logic of evolutionary psychology -- Reasoning about reciprocity -- Box 18.1. Clerical problem -- Box 18.2. Bartender's problem I -- Box 18.3. Bartender's problem II -- Evolutionary psychology and human universals -- Inbreeding avoidance -- Box 18.4. Why inbred matings are bad -- Evolution and human culture -- Culture is a derived trait in humans -- Reading : cultural diversity and human universals -- Box 18.5. Examples of culture in other animals -- Culture is an adaptation -- Human behavioral ecology -- 19. Human mate choice and parenting -- The psychology of human mate preferences -- Some social consequences of mate preferences -- Kipsigis bridewealth -- Nyinba polyandry -- Raising children -- Child abuse and infanticide -- Adoption -- Family size -- Is human evolution over? -- Reading : the relationship between science and morality

pt. 3. The history of the human lineage -- 10. From tree shrew to ape -- Continental drift and climate change -- The methods of paleontology -- The evolution of the early primates -- The first anthropoids -- Box 10.1. Facts that teeth can reveal -- Box 10.2. Missing links -- The emergence of the hominoids -- Reading : the world of the ancient apes -- 11. From hominoid to hominid -- At the beginning -- Ardipithecus ramidus -- Reading : Toumai, child of a dry season -- Orrorin tugenensis -- The hominid community diversifies -- Australopithecus -- A. anamensis -- A. afarensis -- A. africanus -- A. garhi -- A. habilis/rudolfensis -- Paranthropus -- Box 11.1. Chemical clues about the diet of paranthropines -- Kenyanthropus -- Hominid phylogenies -- The evolution of early hominid morphology and behavior -- The evolution of bipedality -- Early hominid subsistence -- Early hominid social organization -- Reading : walking through time -- 12. Oldowan toolmakers and the origin of human life history -- The Oldowan toolmakers -- Box 12.1. Ancient toolmaking and tool use -- Complex foraging shapes human life history -- Box 12.2. What meat eating favors food sharing -- Evidence for complex foraging by Oldowan toolmakers -- Archaeological evidence for meat eating -- Reading : an Oldowan challenge -- Hunters or scavengers? -- Domestic lives of Oldowan toolmakers -- Back to the future : the transition to modern human life histories -- 13. From hominid to homo -- Hominids of the Lower Pleistocene : Homo ergaster -- Morphology -- Tools and subsistence -- Hominids of the early Middle Pleistocene (900 to 300 kya) -- Box 13.1. Reconstructing ancient climates using deep-sea cores -- Eastern Asia : Homo erectus -- Reading : the story of the first missing link -- Africa and Western Eurasia : Homo heidelbergensis -- Hominids of the later Pleistocene (300 to 50 kya) -- Eastern Eurasia : H. erectus and H. heidelbergensis -- Western Eurasia : the Neanderthals -- Africa : the road to Homo sapiens? -- The sources of change -- The muddle in the middle -- 14. Homo sapiens and the evolution of modern human behavior -- Modern Homo sapiens -- Archaeological evidence for modern human behavior -- Upper Paleolithic technology and culture -- Reading : when lions ruled France -- Origin and spread of modern humans -- Box 14.1. The multiregional hypothesis -- Genetic data -- Box 14.2. Mitochondrial Eve -- Evidence from fossils and tool kits -- Modern human behavior : revolution or evolution? -- The African archaeological record during the Later Pleistocene -- How modern human behavior evolved -- Box 14.3. Arcy-sur-cure and the causes of modern human behavior -- 15. The evolution of language -- Language is an adaptation -- Speech production and perception -- Grammar -- Reading : happily blinkered humans -- Language capacities are derived -- How language evolved -- When language evolved -- Did language arise early? -- Did language arise late?

Inherent cut off text

Obscured text.

Skewed text.
