# New fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco and the pan-African origin of Homo sapiens

# Kent Academic Repository 

# Full text document (pdf) 

Copyright & reuse 

Content in the Kent Academic Repository is made available for research purposes. Unless otherwise stated all content is protected by copyright and in the absence of an open licence (eg Creative Commons), permissions for further reuse of content should be sought from the publisher, author or other copyright holder. 

Versions of research 

The version in the Kent Academic Repository may differ from the final published version. Users are advised to check http://kar.kent.ac.uk for the status of the paper. Users should always cite the published version of record. 

Enquiries 

For any further enquiries regarding the licence status of this document, please contact: 

researchsupport@kent.ac.uk 

If you believe this document infringes copyright then please contact the KAR admin team with the take-down 

information provided at http://kar.kent.ac.uk/contact.html 

# Citation for published version 

Hublin, Jean-Jacques and Ben-Ncer, Abdelouahed and Bailey, Shara E. and Freidline, Sarah E. and Neubauer, Simon and Skinner, Matthew M. and Bergmann, Inga and Le Cabec, Adeline and Benazzi, Stefano and Harvati, Katerina and Gunz, Philipp (2017) New fossils from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco and the pan-African origin of Homo sapiens. Nature, 546 (7657). pp. 289-292. ISSN 

# DOI 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22336 

# Link to record in KAR 

http://kar.kent.ac.uk/62267/ 

# Document Version 

Author's Accepted Manuscript 1 Title: New fossils from Jebel )rhoud ȋMoroccoȌ and the PanǦAfrican origin of Homo 

2 sapiens Ǥ

3

4 JeanǦJacques (ublin ͳ

5 Abdelouahed BenǦNcer ʹ

6 Shara EǤ Bailey ͵

7 Sarah EǤ Freidline ͳ

8 Simon Neubauer ͳ

9 Matthew MǤ Skinner Ͷ

10 )nga Bergmann ͳ

11 Adeline Le Cabec ͳ

12 Stefano Benazzi ͷ

13 Katerina (arvati ͸

14 Philipp Gunz ͳ

15 

16 ͳ Department of (uman Evolutionǡ Max Planck )nstitute for Evolutionary Anthropologyǡ 

17 Deutscher Platz ͸ǡ Leipzigǡ ͲͶͳͲ͵ǡ Germany 

18 ʹ )nstitut National des Sciences de l̵Archéologie et du Patrimoineǡ Rabatǡ Morocco 

19 ͵Department of Anthropologyǡ Center for the Study of (uman Originsǡ New York 

20 Universityǡ New Yorkǡ NY ͳͲͲͲ͵ǡ USA 

21 ͶSchool of Anthropology and Conservationǡ University of Kentǡ Canterbury CTʹ ͹NRǡ 

22 United Kingdom 

23 ͷDepartment of Cultural (eritageǡ University of Bolognaǡ Ravenna Ͷͺͳʹͳǡ )taly 24 ͸Paleoanthropologyǡ Senckenberg Center for (uman Evolution and Paleoenvironmentǡ 

25 and DFG Center for Advanced Studiesǣ ǲWordsǡ Bonesǡ Genesǡ Toolsǳǡ Eberhard Karls 

26 Universitätǡ Tuǅbingenǡ Germany 27 Fossil evidence points to an African origin of Homo sapiens from a group called 

28 either H. heidelbergensis or H. rhodesiensis . However, the exact place and time of 

29 our speciesí emergence remain obscure because the fossil record is scarce and the 

30 chronological age of many key specimens remains uncertain. In particular, it is 

31 unclear whether the present day ìmodernî morphology emerged rapidly ca. 200 

32 thousand years ago (ka) among earlier representatives of H. sapiens 1 or evolved 

33 gradually over the last 400 ka 2. Here, we report on new human fossils from Jebel 

34 Irhoud (Morocco), and interpret the affinities of the hominins from this site with 

35 other archaic and recent human groups. We identified a mosaic of features 

36 including a facial, mandibular and dental morphology that aligns the Jebel Irhoud 

37 material with early (EMH) or recent anatomically modern humans (RMH) and a 

38 more primitive neurocranial and endocranial morphology. In combination with 

39 the new date of 300-350 ka 3, this evidence makes Jebel Irhoud the oldest and 

40 richest African Middle Stone Age hominin site documenting early stages of the H. 

41 sapiens clade in which key features of modern morphology were established. 

42 Furthermore, it shows that the evolutionary processes behind the emergence of 

43 our species were not restricted to sub-Saharan Africa. 

44 

45 )n ͳͻ͸Ͳǡ mining operations in the Jebel )rhoud massif ͷͷ km southeast of Safiǡ Morocco 

46 exposed a Palaeolithic site in the Pleistocene filling of a karstic networkǤ An almost 

47 complete skull ȋ)rhoud ͳȌ was accidentally unearthed in ͳͻ͸ͳǡ prompting excavations 

48 that yielded an adult braincase ȋ)rhoud ʹȌ Ͷǡ an immature mandible ȋ)rhoud ͵Ȍ ͷǡ an 

49 immature humeral shaft ͸ǡ an immature ilium ͹ and a fragment of mandible ͺ associated 

50 with abundant faunal remains and Levallois stone tool technology ͸Ǥ Although these 51 human remains were all reported to come from the bottom of the archaeological 

52 depositsǡ only the precise location of the humeral shaft was recordedǤ 

53 

54 The interpretation of the )rhoud hominins has long been complicated by persistent 

55 uncertainties surrounding their geological ageǤ They were initially assigned to a time 

56 period caǤ ͶͲ ka ago and considered to be an African form of Neanderthal ͻǤ (oweverǡ 

57 these affinities have been challenged ͷǡͳͲǡͳͳ and the faunal ͺ and microfaunal ͳʹ evidence 

58 supported a middle Pleistocene ȋMPȌ age for the siteǤ An attempt to date one of the 

59 hominins directly by U seriesǦESR ͵ suggested an age of ͳ͸Ͳ ά ͳ͸ ka ͳ͵ Ǥ Consistent with 

60 some genetic evidence ͳͶ ǡ fossils from Ethiopia ȋOmo Kibishǡ considered to be as old as 

61 ~ͳͻͷ ka ͳͷ and (ertoǡ dated to ~ͳ͸Ͳ ͳ͸ kaȌ are commonly regarded as the first EM(Ǥ 

62 )ntriguinglyǡ Omo ͳ and the (erto specimens appear to be more derived than the 

63 supposedly contemporaneous or even younger )rhoud homininsǤ )t has therefore been 

64 suggested that the archaic features of the )rhoud fossils may indicate that North African 

65 H. sapiens interbred with Neanderthals ͳ͹ ǡ or that the )rhoud hominins represented a 

66 North Africanǡ late survivingǡ archaic population ͳͺ Ǥ

67 

68 New excavations at )rhoud have recovered in situ archaeological material and 

69 established a precise chronology for the depositsǡ which are much older than previously 

70 thought ͵Ǥ The excavation yielded a new series of hominin remainsǡ including an adult 

71 skull ȋ)rhoud ͳͲȌ comprising of a distorted braincase and fragments of the face ȋFigǤ ͳȌǡ a 

72 nearly complete adult mandible ȋ)rhoud ͳͳȌ ȋFigǤ ʹȌǡ one maxillaǡ several postcranial 

73 elementsǡ and abundant dental material ȋExtended Data Table ͳȌǤ These remains 

74 primarily come from a single bone bed in the lower part of the archaeological depositsǤ 

75 This concentrationǡ stratigraphical observations made by previous excavatorsǡ and the 76 anatomical similarity with earlier discoveries strongly suggest that mostǡ if not allǡ of the 

77 hominin remains from the site were accumulated in a rather constrained window of 

78 time corresponding to the formation of layer ͹Ǥ This layer contains the remains of at 

79 least five individuals ȋthree adultsǡ one adolescent and one immatureǡ caǤ ͹Ǥͷ years oldȌǤ 

80 )t now has a thermoluminescence ȋTLȌ weighted average age between ͵ͲͲ and ͵ͷͲ ka 

81 with a ͻͷ Ψ probabilityǡ compatible with a series of newly established U seriesǦESR 

82 dates ͵Ǥ This timeframe places the )rhoud evidence in an entirely new perspectiveǤ 

83 

84 Facial and mandibular morphology 

85 When compared to the largeǡ robust and prognathic faces of the Neanderthals or older 

86 MP formsǡ the facial morphology of EM( and RM( is very distinctiveǤ The face is 

87 relatively short and retracted under the braincaseǤ Facial structures are coronally 

88 oriented and the infraorbital area is of ǲinflexionǦtypeǳǡ displaying curvatures along the 

89 horizontalǡ sagittal and coronal profilesǤ This patternǡ which may include some primitive 

90 retentions ͳͻ ǡ strongly influences the morphology of the maxilla and zygomatic boneǤ Our 

91 morphometric analysis ȋFigǤ ͵ and MethodsȌ clearly distinguishes MP archaic humans 

92 and Neanderthals from RM(Ǥ )n contrastǡ all the possible reconstructions of the new 

93 facial remains of )rhoud ͳͲ fall well within RM( variationǡ as does )rhoud ͳǤ 

94 

95 Another facial characteristic observed in RM( is the weakness of their brow ridgesǤ 

96 Some EM( from Africa and the Levant still display protruding supraorbital structuresǡ 

97 but they tend to be dissociated into a medial superciliary arch and a lateral supraorbital 

98 archǤ Among the )rhoud hominins these structures are rather variableǡ which may be 

99 related to sexual dimorphismǤ )rhoud ͳ displays protruding supraorbital structures and 

100 the arches are poorly separatedǤ (owever in frontal viewǡ the supraorbital buttress 101 tends to form an inverted V above each orbitǤ On )rhoud ʹǡ the torus is less projecting 

102 and a modern pattern is already well expressedǡ with a clear sulcus separating the two 

103 archesǤ On )rhoud ͳͲǡ the preserved parts do not display projecting supraorbital 

104 

105 

structures ȋFigǤ ͳȌǤ 

106 The new )rhoud ͳͳ mandible is very large overall ȋFigǤ ʹǡ Extended Data Table ʹȌǤ As in 

107 some EM( from the Levant or North Africaǡ it has retained a vertical symphysisǡ with a 

108 mental angle of ͺͺǤͺι ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͳȌǤ The mandibular body displays a pattern 

109 typical of H. sapiens ǣ its height strongly decreases from the front to th e backǤ This feature 

110 is also present on the immature individual )rhoud ͵Ǥ Another modern aspect of )rhoud 

111 ͳͳ is the rather narrow section of the mandibular body expressed by the breadthȀheight 

112 index at the level of the mental foramen ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͳȌǤ The )rhoud mandibles 

113 also display some derived conditions in the mental area ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͳȌǤ The 

114 symphyseal section of )rhoud ͳͳ has a tearǦshaped outline quite distinctive of our 

115 speciesǤ Although the )rhoud mandibles lack a marked mandibular incurvationǡ the 

116 juvenile )rhoud ͵ displays a central keel between two depressions expanding inferiorly 

117 into a thickened triangular eminenceǤ This inverted TǦshapeǡ typical of recent H. 

118 sapiens ʹͲ ǡ is incipient on the adultǤ )ts inferior border is somewhat distended and 

119 includes separated tuberclesǤ Notablyǡ this modern pattern is still inconsistently present 

120 on Levantine EM( ʹͲ Ǥ )n some aspectsǡ )rhoud ͳͳ is evocative of the Tabun ʹ mandibleǡ 

121 

122 

but is much more robustǤ 

123 Dental morphology 

124 The )rhoud teeth are generally very large ȋExtended Data Tables ͵ and ͶȌǤ (oweverǡ 

125 their dental morphology is reminiscent of EM( in several respectsǤ The anterior teeth do 126 not display the expansion observed in nonǦ sapiens MP hominins and Neanderthals ʹͳ and 

127 the postcanine teeth are reduced compared to older homininsǤ The M ͵ of the )rhoud ʹͳ 

128 maxilla is already smaller than in some EM(Ǥ The crown morphology ȋExtended Data 

129 Table ͷ and Extended Data FigǤ ʹȌ also aligns the )rhoud specimens most closely with H. 

130 sapiens, rather than with nonǦ sapiens MP hominins and NeanderthalsǤ They do not 

131 display expanded and protruding M ͳ hypoconesǡ lower molar middle trigonid crests 

132 ȋespecially at the EDJȌǡ or a P Ͷ with a transverse crestǡ uninterrupted by a longitudinal 

133 fissureǤ The molars are morphologically complex and reminiscent of largeǦtoothed 

134 African EM(ǡ possessing accessory features such as cusp ͸ǡ cusp ͹ and protostylid on the 

135 lower molars and cusp ͷ on the upper molarsǤ The enamelǦdentine junction analysis 

136 demonstrates the retention of a nonǦNeanderthal primitive pattern of the P Ͷ ȋExtended 

137 Data FigǤ ʹbȌǤ (oweverǡ derived crown shapes shared with RM( are already expressed 

138 on the upper and lower molarsǡ grouping )rhoud ͳͳ with EM( from North Africa and the 

139 LevantǤ The lower incisor and canine roots retain a large sizeǡ but the shape is already 

140 within the range of the modern distribution ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͵ȌǤ Mandibular molar 

141 roots are cynodontǡ iǤeǤ modern humanǦlikeǤ This mandibular root configuration of 

142 )rhoud ͳͳ is similar to that observed in EM( from QafzehǤ Finallyǡ )rhoud ͵ shows a 

143 

144 

pattern of eruption and a period of dental development close to recent H. sapiens ͳ͵ Ǥ

145 Neurocranium 

146 )n contrast to their modern facial morphologyǡ the )rhoud crania retain a rather 

147 primitive overall shape of the braincase and endocastǡ iǤeǤ unlike those of RM(ǡ they are 

148 elongated and not globular ͳͲǡͳͺǡʹʹ Ǥ This is expressed in a low outline of the occipital 

149 squamaǡ elongated temporal bones and a low convexity of the parietal ͳͳ Ǥ (oweverǡ the 

150 frontal squama displays a rather vertical orientation and a marked convexity when 151 compared to that of archaic MP specimensǤ These derived conditions are especially well 

152 expressed on )rhoud ʹ ͳͳ Ǥ A geometric morphometric analysis ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͶȌ of 

153 external vault shape distinguishes Neanderthals and archaic MP forms with their 

154 primitive neurocranial shape from RM( and Upper Palaeolithic (umansǤ With regards 

155 to PC ͳǡ )rhoud ͳ and ʹ are intermediate and group together with specimens such as 

156 Laetoli (ͳͺ and Qafzeh as well as Upper Palaeolithic individuals from Mladeč or 

157 Zhoukoudian Upper CaveǤ To some degree all these specimens retained longer and 

158 

159 

lower braincase proportions compared to RM(Ǥ 

160 The morphometric analysis of endocranial shape ȋFigǤ ͵bȌǡ which is not affected by 

161 cranial superstructuresǡ shows a clear separation between H. erectus and the 

162 NeanderthalȀarchaic MP cluster along PC ʹǤ The latter have evolved larger neocortices 

163 butǡ in contrast to RM(ǡ without proportional increase of the cerebellum ȋExtended Data 

164 FigǤ ͷȌǤ EM( and the )rhoud hominins also display elongated endocranial profilesǡ but 

165 are intermediate between H. erectus and the cluster of Neanderthals Ȁarchaic MP 

166 hominins along PCʹǤ They range in rough agreement with their geological age along PCͳǡ 

167 in a morphological cline ending with extant globular brain shapes of RM(Ǥ Notablyǡ Omo 

168 ʹ falls between )rhoud ͳ and ʹǤ This similarity reǦopens the question of the 

169 contemporaneity of Omo ͳ and ʹ ʹ͵ but also raises the possibility of a late evolution of 

170 

171 

172 

modern brain shape in the H. sapiens cladeǤ 

Conclusion 

173 The )rhoud fossils currently represent the most securely dated evidence of the early 

174 phase of Homo sapiens evolution in Africaǡ and they do not simply appear as 

175 intermediate between African archaic MP forms and RM( . Even caǤ ͵ͲͲǦ͵ͷͲ ka ago their 

176 facial morphology is almost indistinguishable from that of RM(ǡ corroborating the 177 interpretation of the fragmentary specimen from Florisbad ȋSouth AfricaȌ as a primitive 

178 H. sapiens tentatively dated to ʹ͸Ͳ ka ʹͶ Ǥ Anatomical mandibular and dental featuresǡ as 

179 well as developmental patterns also align them with EM(Ǥ )mportantlyǡ the endocast 

180 analysis suggests diverging evolutionary trajectories between early H. sapiens and MP 

181 archaic African formsǤ This anatomical evidence and the chronological proximity 

182 between the two groups ʹͷ reinforce the hypothesis of a rapid anatomical shift or evenǡ as 

183 

184 

suggested by some ʹ͸ ǡ of a chronological overlapǤ 

185 The )rhoud evidence supports a complex evolutionary history of our species involving 

186 the whole African continent ʹͷǡʹ͹ Ǥ Like in the Neandertal lineage ʹͺ ǡ facial morphology was 

187 established early onǡ and evolution in the last ͵ͲͲ ka primarily affected the braincaseǤ 

188 This likely occurred in relation to a series of genetic changes affecting brain 

189 connectivity ʹͻ ǡ organization and development ʹʹ Ǥ Through accretional changesǡ the 

190 )rhoud morphology is directly evolvable into that of extant humansǤ Delimiting clearǦcut 

191 anatomical boundaries for a ǲmodernǳ grade within the H. sapiens clade thus only 

192 depends on gaps in the fossil record ͵Ͳ ǤReferences .

ͳ Stringerǡ CǤ Modern human originsǣ progress and prospectsǤ Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 

Lond. B 357 ǡ ͷ͸͵Ǧͷ͹ͻ ȋʹͲͲʹȌǤ ʹ Bräuerǡ GǤ The origin of modern anatomyǣ by speciation or intraspecific evolutionǫ 

Evolutionary Anthropology 17 ǡ ʹʹǦ͵͹ ȋʹͲͲͺȌǤ ͵ Richterǡ DǤ et al. The Age of the Homo sapiens fossils and Middle Stone Age artefacts from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco ȋʹͲͳ͸ȌǤ Manuscript submitted for publicationǤ Ͷ Ennouchiǡ EǤ Le deuxième crâne de l̵homme d̵)rhoudǤ Annales de PalÈontologie (VÈrtÈbrÈs) LIV ǡ ͳͳ͹Ǧͳʹͺ ȋͳͻ͸ͺȌǤ ͷ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ Ƭ Tillierǡ AǤ MǤ The Mousterian Juvenile Mandible from )rhoud ȋMoroccoȌǣ A Phylogenetic )nterpretationǤ in Aspects of Human Evolution VolǤ ʹͳ 

Symposia of the Society for the study of Human Biology, Volume XXI ȋed CǤBǤ StringerȌ ͳ͸͹Ǧͳͺ͸ ȋTaylor Ƭ Francis LtdǤǡ ͳͻͺͳȌǤ ͸ (ublinǡ JǤ JǤǡ Tillierǡ AǤ MǤ Ƭ Tixierǡ JǤ L̵humeru s d̵enfant m oustérien ȋ(omo ͶȌ du Jebel )rhoud ȋMarocȌ dans son contexte archéologiqueǤ Bulletins et MÈmoires de la SociÈtÈ d'Anthropologie de Paris 4ǡ ͳͳͷǦͳͶʹ ȋͳͻͺ͹ȌǤ ͹ Tixierǡ JǤǡ Brugalǡ JǤǦPǤǡ Tillierǡ AǤǦMǤǡ Bruzeketǡ JǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ )rhoud ͷǡ un fragment d̵os coxal non adulte des niveaux mousteriens maroc ainsǤ in Actes des 1Ëres JournÈes Nationales d'ArchÈologie et du Patrimoine. Volume 1: PrÈhistoire VolǤ ͳ ͳͶͻǦͳͷ͵ ȋSociété Marocaine d̵Archéologie et du Patr imoineǡ ʹͲͲͳȌǤ ͺ Amaniǡ FǤ Ƭ Geraadsǡ DǤ Le gisement moustérien du Djebel )rhoudǡ Marocǣ précisions sur la faune et la biochronologieǡ et description d̵ un nouveau reste humainǤ Comptes Rendus ‡ l'AcadÈmie des Sciences de Paris 316 ǡ ͺͶ͹Ǧͺͷʹ ȋͳͻͻ͵ȌǤ ͻ Ennouchiǡ EǤ Un Néanderthalienǣ l̵homme du Jebel )rho ud ȋMarocȌǤ L'anthropologie 

66 ǡ ʹ͹ͻǦʹͻͻ ȋͳͻ͸ʹȌǤ ͳͲ Stringerǡ CǤ BǤ Some problems in middle and upper Pleistocene hominid relationshipǤ in Recent advances in Primatology. ȋeds DǤJǤ Chivers Ƭ KǤAǤ JoyseyȌ ͵ͻͷǦͶͳͺ ȋAcademic Pressǡ ͳͻ͹ͺȌǤ ͳͳ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ Recent human evolution in Northwestern AfricaǤ Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 

Lond. B337 ǡ ͳͺͷǦͳͻͳ ȋͳͻͻʹȌǤ ͳʹ Geraadsǡ DǤ et al. The rodents from the late middle Pleistocene homini dǦbearing site of J̵bel )rhoudǡ Moroccoǡ and their chronologi cal and paleoenvironmental implicationsǤ Quaternary Research 80 ǡ ͷͷʹǦͷ͸ͳ ȋʹͲͳ͵ȌǤ ͳ͵ Smithǡ TǤ MǤ et al. Earliest evidence of modern human life history in North African early Homo sapiens Ǥ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 104 

ȋʹͲͲ͹ȌǤ ͳͶ Gonderǡ MǤ KǤǡ Mortensenǡ (Ǥ MǤǡ Reedǡ FǤ AǤǡ de Sousaǡ AǤ Ƭ Tishkoffǡ SǤ AǤ WholeǦ mtDNA Genome Sequence Analysis of Ancient African LineagesǤ Molecular Biology and Evolution 24 ǡ ͹ͷ͹Ǧ͹͸ͺ ȋʹͲͲ͹ȌǤ 

ͳͷ McDougallǡ )Ǥǡ Brownǡ FǤ (Ǥ Ƭ Fleagleǡ JǤ GǤ Stratigraphic placement and age of modern humans from Kibishǡ EthiopiaǤ Nature 433 ǡ ͹͵͵Ǧ͹͵͸ ȋʹͲͲͷȌǤ ͳ͸ Whiteǡ TǤ DǤ et al. Pleistocene Homo sapiens from Middle Awashǡ EthiopiaǤ Nature 

423 ǡ ͹ͶʹǦ͹Ͷ͹ ȋʹͲͲ͵ȌǤ ͳ͹ Smithǡ FǤ (Ǥ The role of continuity in modern human originsǤ in Continuity or replacement, controversies in Homo sapiens evolution ȋeds G“nter Bräuer Ƭ Fred (Ǥ SmithȌ ͳͶͷǦͳͷ͸ ȋAǤ AǤ Balkemaǡ Zagrebǡ ͳͻͻʹȌǤ ͳͺ Brunerǡ EǤ Ƭ Pearsonǡ OǤ Neurocranial evolution in modern humansǣ the case of Jebel )rhoud ͳǤ Anthropological Science 121 ǡ ͵ͳ ȋʹͲͳ͵ȌǤ ͳͻ Bermúdez de Castroǡ JǤMǤǡ Arsuagaǡ JǤLǤǡ Carbonellǡ EǤǡ Rosasǡ AǤǡ Martinezǡ )Ǥǡ Mosqueraǡ MǤǡ A hominid from the Lower Pleistocene of Atapuercaǡ Spainǣ possible ancestor to Neandertals and modern humans Science ǡ 276, ǡͳ͵ͻʹǦͳ͵ͻͷ ȋͳͻͻ͹ȌǤ ʹͲ Schwartzǡ JǤ (Ǥ Ƭ Tattersallǡ )Ǥ The human chin revisitedǣ what is it and who has itǫ 

Journal of Human Evolution 38 ǡ ͵͸͹ǦͶͲͻ ȋʹͲͲͲȌǤ ʹͳ Trinkausǡ EǤ Dental Remains from the Shanidar Adult NeanderthalsǤ J Hum. Evol. 7,

͵͸ͻǦ͵ͺʹ ȋͳͻ͹ͺȌ ʹʹ Gunzǡ PǤ et al. A uniquely modern human pattern of endocranial developmentǤ )nsights from a new cranial reconstruction of the Ne andertal newborn from MezmaiskayaǤ Journal of Human Evolution 62 ǡ ͵ͲͲǦ͵ͳ͵ ȋʹͲͳʹȌǤ ʹ͵ Klein RGǤ The human career: human biological and cultural origins ȋthird editionȌǤ Chicagoǣ University of Chicago PressǤ ȋʹͲͲͻȌǤ ʹͶ Gr“nǡ RǤ et al. Direct dating of Florisbad hominidǤ Nature 382 ǡ ͷͲͲǦͷͲͳ ȋͳͻͻ͸ȌǤ ʹͷ Stringerǡ CǤ The origin of our species Ǥ ȋAllen Lane Ǧ Penguin Booksǡ ʹͲͳͳȌǤ ʹ͸ (arvatiǡ KǤ et al. The Later Stone Age Calvaria from )wo Eleruǡ Nigeria ǣ Morphology and ChronologyǤ PLoS ONE 6ǡ eʹͶͲʹͶǡ ȋʹͲͳͳȌǤ ʹ͹ Gunzǡ PǤ et al. Early modern human diversity suggests subdivided po pulation structure and a complex outǦofǦAfrica scenarioǤ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 ǡ ͸ͲͻͶǦ͸Ͳͻͺ ȋʹͲͲͻȌǤ ʹͺ Arsuaga JǤLǤ et al Ǥ Neandertal rootsǣ Cranial and chronological evide nce from Sima de los (uesosǤ Science 344 ǡ ͳ͵ͷͺǦͳ͵͸͵ ȋʹͲͳͶȌ ʹͻ Meyerǡ MǤ et al. A (ighǦCoverage Genome Sequence from an Archaic Deni sovan )ndividualǤ Science 338 ǡ ʹʹʹǦʹʹ͸ǡ ȋʹͲͳʹȌǤ ͵Ͳ Weaverǡ TǤ DǤ Did a discrete event ʹͲͲǡͲͲͲȂͳͲͲǡͲͲͲ years ago produce modern humansǫ Journal of Human Evolution 63 ǡ ͳʹͳǦͳʹ͸ǡ ȋʹͲͳʹȌǤ Acknowledgements: 

The research program at Jebel Irhoud is jointly conducted and supported by the Moroccan Institut National des Sciences de líArchÈologie et du Patrimoine and the Department of Human Evolution of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. We are grateful to the many curators and colleagues who, over the years, gave us access to innumerable recent and fossil hominin specimens for CT-scanning or analysis, to Erik Trinkaus for providing comparative data and to Christopher Kiarie, Mikaela Lui, Chloe Piot, David Plotzki, Alyson Reid and Heiko Temming for their technical assistance. METHODS 

Computed tomography 

The original fossil specimens were scanned using a B)R ARCT)S ʹʹͷȀ͵ͲͲ industrial microǦ CT scanner , at the Max Planck )nstitute for Evolutionary Anthropology ȋMP) EVAȌǡ Leipzigǡ GermanyǤ The nonǦdental material was scanned with an isotropic voxel size ranging from ʹ͹ǤͶ to ͻͳǤͶ ρm ȋͳ͵Ͳ kVǡ ͳͲͲ to ͳͷͲ ρAǡ ͲǤʹͷ to ʹǤͲ mm brass filterǡ ͲǤͳͶͶ degree of rotation stepǡ ʹ to ͵ frames averagingǡ ͵͸Ͳ degrees of rotationȌǤ The dental material was scanned with an isotropic voxel size ranging from ͳʹǤͺ to ͵ʹǤͺ ρm ȋͳ͵Ͳ kVǡ ͳͲͲ ρAǡ ͲǤʹͷ to ͲǤͷ mm brass filterǡ ͲǤͳͶͶ degree of rotation stepǡ ͵ frames averagingǡ ͵͸Ͳ degrees of rotationȌǤ Segmentation of the microǦCT volume was performed in Avizo ȋVisualization Sciences GroupȌǤ The comparative dental sample was scanned with an isotropic voxel size ranging from ͳͳǤ͸ to ͵ͻǤͳ ρm at the MP) EVA on a B)R ARCT)S ʹʹͷȀ͵ͲͲ microǦCT scanner ȋͳ͵Ͳ to ͳͺͲ kVǡ ͳͲͲ to ͳͷͲ ρAǡ ͲǤʹͷ to ʹǤͲ mm brass filterǡ ͲǤͲͻ͸ to ͲǤͳͶͶ degree of rotation stepǡ ʹ to Ͷ frames averagingǡ ͵͸Ͳ degrees of rotationȌ or on a Skyscan ͳͳ͹ʹ microǦCT scanner ȋͳͲͲ kVǡ ͳͲͲ ρAǡ ͲǤͷ mm aluminum and ͲǤͲͶ mm copper filtersǡ ͲǤͳͲ to ͳǤʹͷ degree of rotation stepǡ ͵͸Ͳ degrees of rotationǡ ʹ to Ͷ frames averagingȌǤ The microǦ CT slices were filtered using a median filter followed by a meanǦofǦleastǦvariance filter ȋeach with a kernel size of threeȌ to reduce the background noise while preserving and enhancing edges ͵ͳ Ǥ

Virtual Reconstruction 

Using Avizoǡ nine reconstructions of the Jebel )rhoud ͳͲ face were made based on segmented surfaces of its preserved parts consisting of a left supraorbital torusǡ two left maxillary fragments and a nearly complete left zygomatic boneǤ Firstǡ we used several recent modern humans from diverse geographical regions ȋeǤgǤǡ Africaǡ North America and AustraliaȌ and )rhoud ͳ as a reference to align the two left maxillary bonesǤ Since a large portion of the dental arcade of )rhoud ͳͲ is preservedǡ the range of possible ǲanatomically correctǳ alignments in the palate was limited ȋFigure ͳbȌǤ Based on this maxillary alignmentǡ each of the subsequent reconstructions differed by several millimeters in the following waysǣ broadening the palateǢ increasing the facial heightǢ increasing the orbital heightǢ or rotating the zygomatic bones anteriorly or posteriorly in a parasagittal directionǤ Additionallyǡ we aligned one reconstruction to match the facial proportions and orientation of a ǲclassicǳ Neanderthal ȋLa Ferrassie ͳȌǤ )n doing soǡ the zygomatic bone was rotated parasagittally and moved posteriorly ȋε ͷ mmȌǤ Correspondinglyǡ the brow ridge was realigned posteroǦsuperiorly by several mmǡ and the maxillary bones were moved inferiorly several mm to increase its facial heightǤ For each reconstructionǡ each bone was mirrorǦimaged along the midǦsagittal plane of )rhoud ͳ and then the right and left sides were merged to form one surface modelǤ The reconstruction of the )rhoud ͳͳ mandible was conducted by mirroring the left side of the mandibleǡ which was best preserved and minimally distortedǡ onto the right sideǡ apart from the condyleǡ which was only preserved on the right side and mirrored onto the left sideǤ The left side of the mandible was represented by three main fragmentsǤ Before mirroringǡ the sediment filling the cracks between the main fragments was virtually removedǡ the fragments were reǦfitted and the broken crown of the left canine was reset on its rootǤ Note that the position of the condyles in the reconstruction is only indicativeǤ 

Shape analysis of the face, endocast and cranial vault 

Geometric morphometric methods ȋGMMȌ were used to analyse different aspects of morphology of the )rhoud fossils in a comparative contextǤ To this end we digitised threeǦ dimensional landmarks and sliding semilandmarks ͵ʹǡ ͵͵ǡ ͵Ͷ to separately analyse the shape of the faceǡ the endocranial profile and the external vaultǤ On the face ȋFigure ͵aȌǡ ͵D coordinates of anatomical landmarksǡ as well as curve and surface semilandmarks ȋnα͹ͻͳȌ were digitized using Landmark Editor ͵ͷ either on CT scans ȋB)R ACT)S ʹʹͷȀ͵ͲͲ and Toshiba AquilionȌǡ or surface scans ȋMinolta Vivid ͻͳͲ and Breuckmann optoTOPǦ (EȌ of recent modern human and fossil crania ȋ n αʹ͸͹Ȍ following Freidline et al. ͵͸ ǤWhenever possibleǡ measurements were taken on scans of the original fossilǢ landmarks on some fossil specimens were measured on scans of researchǦquality castsǤ Avizo was used to extract surface files from the CT scansǢ da ta from surface scanners were preǦ processed using Geomagic Studio ȋGeomagic )ncǤȌ and OptoCat ȋBreuckmannȌǤ On the endocast ȋFigǤ ͵bȌǡ landmarks and semilandmarks ȋ n α͵ͳȌ along the internal midsagittal profile of the braincase were digitised on CT scans of the original specimens ȋ n αͺ͸Ȍ in Avizo ȋVisualization Sciences GroupȌ following the measurement protocol described in Neubauer et al Ǥ͵͹ ǡ and converted to twoǦdimensional data by projecting them onto a least squares plane in Mathematica ȋWolfram ResearchȌǤ On the external vault ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͶȌǡ coordinate measurements of ͻ͹ anatomical landmarks and curve semilandmarks ȋalong the external midsagittal profile from glabella to inionǡ the coronal and lambdoid suturesǡ and along the upper margin of the supraorbital torusȌ were captured using a Microscribe ͵DX ȋ)mmersion CorpǤȌ portable digitiser on recent and fossil braincases ȋ n

αʹͻ͸Ȍ following the measurement protocol described in (arvati et al. ͵ͺ Ǥ The points along sutures were later resampled automatically in Mathematica to ensure the same semilandmark count on every specimenǤ 

Homo erectus samples include KNM ER ͵͹͵͵ ȋ͵͹͵͵Ȍǡ KNM ER ͵ͺͺ͵ ȋ͵ͺ ͺ͵Ȍǡ KNM WT ͳͷͲͲͲǤ MP archaic samples include Petralona ȋPetrȌǡ Aragoǡ Sima de los (uesos (ͷ ȋS(ͷȌǡ Saldanhaǡ Kabweǡ BodoǤ Neanderthal samples include La ChapelleǦauxǦSaints ͳ ȋLaChaȌǡ Guattari ͳ ȋGuattȌǡ La Ferrassie ͳ ȋLF ͳȌǡ Forbesǯ Quarry ͳ ȋGibrȌǡ Feldhofer ȋFeldȌǡ La Quina ͷ ȋLQ ͷȌǡ Spy ͳ and ʹ ȋSp ͳǡ Sp ʹȌǡ Amud ͳ ȋA mudȌǡ Shanidar ͳ and ͷ ȋShan ͳǡ Shan ͷȌǤ Primitive H. sapiens and EM( include Laetoli (ͳͺ ȋL(Ȍǡ Omo Kibish ʹ ȋOmo ʹȌǡ Singa ȋSiȌǡ Qafzeh ͸ and ͻ ȋQa ͸ǡ Qa ͻȌǡ Skhul ͷ ȋSk ͷȌǤ Upper Palaeolithic modern humans include CroǦMagnon ͳ and ͵ ȋCroM ͳ CroM ͵Ȍǡ Mladeč ͳ and ͷ ȋMla ͳǡ Mla ͷȌǡ Brno ͵ǡ Předmostí ͵ and Ͷ ȋPre ͵ǡ Pre ͶȌǡ Abri Pataud ȋAbPȌ ǡ Cioclovina ȋCiȌǡ Zhoukoudian Upper Cave ͳ and ʹ ȋZhUC ͳǡ ZhUC ʹȌǤ The RM( samples are composed of individuals of diverse geographical origins ȋnαʹ͵ʹ in Figure ͵aǡ nαͷͷ in F igure ͵bǡ nαʹ͸͵ in Extended Data Figure ͶȌǤ 

Crown outline analysis (Extended Data Figure 3a) 

The crown outline analysis of )rhoud ͳͲ and )rhoud ʹͳ left M ͳ follows the protocol described in Benazzi et al. ͵ͻ and Bailey et al. ͶͲ Ǥ For )rhoud ͳͲǡ CT images were virtually segmented using a semiautomatic thresholdǦbased approach in Avizo to reconstruct a ͵D digital model of the toothǡ which was then imported in Rapidform XORʹ ȋ)NUS Technologyǡ )ncǤǡ Seoulǡ KoreaȌ to compute the cervical planeǤ The tooth was aligned with the cervical plane parallel to the xyǦplane of the Cartesian coordinate system and rotated around the zǦaxis with the lingual side parallel to the xǦaxisǤ The crown outline corresponds to the silhouette of the oriented crown as seen in occlusal view and projected onto the cervical planeǤ For )rhoud ʹͳǡ an occlusal image of the crown was taken with a Nikon D͹ͲͲ digital camera and a MicroǦNikkor ͸Ͳ mm lensǤ The tooth was oriented so that the cervical border was perpendicular to the optical axis of the camera lensǤ The image was imported in Rhino ͶǤͲ Beta CAD environment ȋRobert McNeel Ƭ Associatesǡ Seattleǡ WAȌ and aligned to the xyǦplane of the Cartesian coordinate systemǤ The crown outline was digitised manually using the spline functionǡ and then oriented with the lingual side parallel to the xǦaxisǤ Both crown outlines Ͷͳ were first centered superimposing the centroids of their area according to the M ͳ sample created by Bailey et al. ͶͲ ǡ but integrated with ͳͲ late early and middle Pleistocene Homo Mͳ specimens ȋiǤeǤǡ AragoǦ͵ͳǡ ATǦͶͲ͸ǡ ATD͸Ǧͳͳǡ ATD͸Ǧ͸ͻǡ ATD͸ǦͳͲ͵ǡ BilzingslebenǦ͹͸Ǧͷ͵Ͳǡ Petralonaǡ Steinheimǡ Rabatǡ ThomasǦ͵ȌǤ Thenǡ the outlines were represented by ʹͶ pseudolandmarks obtained by equiangularly spaced radial vectors out of the centroid ȋthe first radius is directed buccally and parallel to the yǦaxis of the Cartesian coordinate systemȌǡ and scaled to unit centroid size ͵ͻǡͶͳ Ǥ Late early and middle Pleistocene archaic samples include Arago ͵ͳ ȋAr ͵ͳȌǡ Atapuerca Gran Dolina ͸Ǧͳͳǡ ͸Ǧ͸ͻǡ ͸ǦͳͲ͵ ȋATD͸Ǧͳͳǡ ATD͸Ǧ͸ͻǡ ATD͸ǦͳͲ͵Ȍǡ Atapuerca Sima de los (uesos ͶͲ͸ ȋATǦͶͲ͸Ȍǡ BilzingslebenǦ͹͸Ǧͷ͵Ͳ ȋBil͹͸Ǧͷ͵ͲȌǡ Petralona ȋPetrȌǡ Steinheim ȋSteinȌǡ Rabat ȋRabȌǡ Thomas ͵ ȋTho ͵ȌǤ Neanderthal samples include ArcyǦsurǦCure ͵ͻǡ Cova Negraǡ Krapina KDP ͳǡ Krapina KDP ͵ǡ Krapina KDP ʹʹǡ Krapina DͳͲͳǡ Krapina Dͳ͹ͳǡ Krapina Max Cǡ Krapina Max Dǡ La Ferrassie ͺǡ La Quina (ͳͺǡ Le Fate X)))ǡ Le Moustier ͳǡ Monsempron ͳͻͷ͵Ǧͳǡ Obi Rakhmatǡ Petit Puymoyenǡ Roc de Marsalǡ SaintǦCésaire ͳ Ǥ EM( include Dar esǦSoltan ))ǦNN ȋDS))Ǧ NNȌǡ Dar esǦSoltan ))Ǧ(͸ ȋDS))Ǧ(͸Ȍǡ Qafzeh ͳͲ ȋQa ͳͲȌǡ Qafzeh ͳͷ ȋQa ͳͷȌǡ Skhul ͳ ȋSkh ͳȌǡ Contrebandiers (͹ ȋCT (͹ȌǤ Upper Palaeolithic modern humans include Abri Pataudǡ 

Fontéchevadeǡ Goughǯs Cave ȋMagdalenianȌǡ Grotta del Fosselloneǡ Kostenki ͳͷǡ Lagar Velhoǡ LaugerieǦBasseǡ La Madeleineǡ Les Rois ͳͻǡ La Rois unnumberedǡ Mladeč ͳǡ Mladeč ʹǡ Peskő Barlangǡ StǤ Germain ʹǡ StǤ Germain B͸ǡ StǤ Germain B͹ǡ Sunghir ʹǡ Sunghir ͵ǡ Veyrier ͳ Ǥ The RM( samples are composed of individuals of diverse geographical origins ȋnαͺͲ )

Molar and premolar enamel-dentine junction shape analysis (Extended Data Figure 3b) 

Enamel and dentine tissues of lower second molars and fourth premolars were segmented using the ͵D voxel value histogram and its distribution of greyǦscale values Skinner et al. ͶʹǡͶ͵ Ǥ After the segmentation the EDJ was reconstructed as a triangleǦbased surface model using Avizo ȋusing unconstrained smoothingȌǤ Small EDJ defects were corrected digitally using the ǲfill holesǳ module of Geomagic StudioǤ We then used Avizo to digitise ͵D landmarks and curveǦsemilandmarks on these EDJ surfaces ͶʹǡͶ͵ Ǥ For the molarsǡ anatomical landmarks were placed on the tip of the dentine horn of the protoconidǡ metaconidǡ entoconidǡ and hypoconidǤ For the premolars anatomical landmarks were placed on protoconid and metaconid dentine hornsǤ Moreoverǡ we placed a sequence of landmarks along the marginal ridge connecting the dentine horns beginning at the top of the protoconid moving in lingual directionǢ the points along this ridge curve were then later resampled to the same point count on every specimen using MathematicaǤ Likewiseǡ we digitised and resampled a curve along the cementoǦenamel junction as a closed curve starting and ending below the protoconid horn and the mesioǦbuccal corner of the cervixǤ The resampled points along the two ridge curves were subsequently treated as sliding curve semilandmarks and analysed using GMM together with the four anatomical landmarksǤ Homo erectus includes KNMǦBK ͸͹ǡ KNMǦER ͻͻʹ ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Sͳb ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Sͷǡ S͸aǤ We also included the Homo habilis ͶͶ specimen KNMǦERǦͳͺͲʹ to establish trait polarityǤ MP archaic samples include Mauer ȋMauerǢ M ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Balanica B(Ǧͳ ȋBalȌǤ Neanderthal samples include Abri Suard S͵͸ǡ Combe Grenal ʹͻǡ Combe Grenal )Vǡ Combe Grenal V)))ǡ El Sidron ͵Ͳ͵ǡ El Sidron ͷͶͲ ǡ El Sidron ͹ͷͷǡ El Sidron ͹͸͵aǡ Krapina ͷ͵ǡ Krapina ͷͶǡ Krapina ͷͷǡ Krapina ͷ͹ǡ Krapina ͷͻǡ Krapina Dͳǡ Krapina D͸ǡ Krapina Dͻǡ Krapina D͵ͷǡ Krapina DͷͲǡ Krapina DͺͲǡ Krapina Dͺ͸ǡ Krapina DͳͲͷǡ Krapina DͳͲ͹ǡ La Quina (ͻǡ Le Moustier ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Le Regourdou ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Scladina ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Vindija ͳͳǦ͵ͻǤ EM( include Dar esǦSoltan )) (Ͷ ȋDS )) Ǧ(ͶȌǡ El (arhoura ȋEl (Ǣ M ʹ and P ͶȌǡ )rhoud ͳͳ ȋ)r ͳͳǢ M ʹ and P ͶȌǡ )rhoud ͵ ȋ)r ͵Ǣ M ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Qafzeh ͻ ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Qafzeh ͳͲǡ Qafzeh ͳͳ ȋM ʹ and P ͶȌǡ Qafzeh ͳͷǡ Contrebandiers ȋCTǢ M ʹ and P ͶȌǤ The RM( samples are composed of individuals of diverse geographical ori gins ȋM ʹ sample nαͺǢ P Ͷ sample nαͺȌǤ 

Tooth root shape analysis (Extended Data Figure 3) 

Dental tissues ȋenamelǡ dentine and pulpȌ of the anterior dentition were first segmented semiautomatically using a region growing toolǡ and when possible using the watershed principle Ͷͷ Ǣ this segmentation was edited manually to correct for cracksǤ Each tooth was then virtually divided into crown and root by cutting the ͵D models at the cervical plane defined by a least square fit plane between landmarks set at the points of greatest curvature on the labial and lingual sides of the cementǦenamel junctionǤ Following Le Cabec et al. Ͷ͸ we analysed dental root shapeǣ using Avizoǡ a landm ark was digitised at the root apex and a sequence of ͵D landmark coordinates was recorded along the cementǦ enamel junctionǤ Using Mathematicaǡ this curve was then resampled to ͷͲ equidistant curveǦsemilandmarksǤ The shape of the root surfaceǡ delimited by the cervical semilandmarks and the apical landmarkǡ was quantified using Ͷͻͻ surfaceǦ semilandmarks Ͷ͸ ǣ a mesh of Ͷͻͻ landmarks was digitised manually on a template specimenǡ then warped to each specimen using a thinǦplate spline interpolation and lofted onto the segmented root surface by projecting to closest surface vertexǤ These landmarks and semilandmarks were then analysed using GMMǤ Homo erectus is represented by KNMǦWT ͳͷͲͲͲ ȋWT ͳͷͲͲͲȌǤ The Neanderthal sample includes Krapina ͷ͵ǡ ͷͶǡ ͷͷǡ ͷͺǡ ͷͻ 

ȋKrpͷ͵ǡ Krp ͷͶǡ Krp ͷͷǡ Krp ͷͺǡ Krp ͷͻȌǡ SaintǦCésaire ͳ ȋSCȌǡ AbriǦBourgeoisǦDelaunay ͳ ȋBDͳȌǡ and Kebara ʹ and ʹͺ ȋKeb ʹǡ KM( ʹͺȌǤ EM( include Contrebandiers ȋCTȌǡ Dar esǦ Soltan ))Ǧ(Ͷ ȋDS))Ǧ(ͶȌ and El (aroura ȋEl (ȌǤ Upper Palaeolithic and Mesolithic modern samples include individuals from Oberkassel ȋObȌǡ NahalǦOren ȋNO ͺǡ NO ͳͶȌǡ (ayonim ȋ(a ͺǡ (a ͳͻǡ (a ʹͲȌǡ Kebara ȋKebAͷȌ and CombeǦCapelle ȋCCȌǤ The RM( sample includes individuals of diverse geographical origins ȋnαͶ͹Ȍ 

Statistical analysis 

͵D landmark and semilandmark data were analysed using GMM functions in Mathematica ͵ͶǡͶ͹ Ǥ Curves and surfaces were quantified using sliding semilandmarks based on minimizing the thinǦplate spline bending energy ͵ʹ between each specimen and the sample mean shape ͵͵ǡ ͵Ͷ Ǥ Missing landmarks or semilandmarks were estimated using a thinǦplate spline interpolation based on the sample mean shape during the sliding process Ͷͺ Ǥ After slidingǡ all landmarks and semilandmarks were converted to shape variables using generalised least squares Procrustes superimposition Ͷͻ Ǣ these data were then analysed using principal component analysis ȋPCAȌǡ and between group PCA ͷͲ Ǥ For the M ͳ crown outlines analysisǡ the shape variables of the outlines were projected into the shapeǦspace obtained from a principal component analysis ȋPCAȌ of the M ͳ comparative sampleǤ The data were processed and analysed through software routines written in R ͷͳ Ǥ

Mandibular metric data (Extended Data Table 2 and Extended Data Figure 1c) 

Linear measurements were taken on ͵D surface models generated from microCT data in AvizoǤ They were complemented by measurements of the original specimens taken by EǤ Trinkaus ȋExtended Data FigǤ ͳcȌ and by comparative data taken from the literature ͷʹǦͻͻ ǤThe African and European MP archaic sample includes KNMǦBK ͸͹ǡ KNMǦBK ͺͷͳͺǡ Sidi Abderrahmane ʹǡ Thomas Quarry )ǡ Thomas Quarry Gh ͳͲ͹ͳ͹ǡ Tighenif ͳǡ ʹǡ ͵ǡ Arago )ǡ X)))ǡ Mauerǡ Montmaurin ͳǡ Sima de los (uesos X)Xǡ XX)ǡ XXV)))ǡ AT ͳǡ AT ͹ͷǡ AT ͵ͲͲǡ AT ͸Ͳͷǡ AT ͸Ͳ͹Ǥ The Asian Neanderthals include Amud ͳǡ Chagyrskaya ͸ǡ Kebara ʹǡ Shanidar ͳǡ ʹ and Ͷ and Tabun CͳǤ The European Neandertals include Arcy ))ǡ Banyolesǡ El Sidrón ͳǡ ʹ and ͵ǡ Guattari ʹ and ͵ǡ (ortus Ͷǡ Krapina ͷ͹ǡ ͷͺ and ͷͻǡ Suard S ͵͸ǡ Bourgeois Delaunay ͳǡ La Ferrassie ͳǡ La Quina ͷǡ La Naulette ͳǡ Le Regourdou ͳǡ Saint Césaireǡ Sima de las Palomas ͳǡ ͸ǡ ʹ͵ǡ ͷͻǡ Spy ͳ and ͵ǡ Subalyuk ͳǡ Vindija ʹͲ͸ǡ ʹʹ͸ǡ ʹ͵ͳǡ ʹͷͲǡ ͳͳǤ͵ͻǡ ͳͳǤͶͲǡ ͳͳǤͶͷǡ WeimarǦEhringsdorf FͳͲͲͻ and ZafarrayaǤ The EM( include Dar esǦSoltan )) (ͷǡ El (arhoura ͳǡ Dire Dawaǡ Klasies Riverǣ KRM ͳ͵ͶͲͲǡ ͳͶ͸ͻͷǡ ͳ͸ͶʹͶ ǡ ʹͳ͹͹͸ and Ͷͳͺͳͷǡ Qafzeh ͻǡ ʹ͸ and ʹ͹ǡ Skhul )Vǡ Skhul Vǡ Tabun Cʹ and Témara ͳǤ The Upper Palaeolithic and Epipalaeolithic sample includes individuals from Abri Pataud ͳǡ Arene Candide ʹ and ͳͺǡ Asselarǡ Barma del Caviglioneǡ Chanceladeǡ Cro Magnon ͳ and ͵ǡ Dar esǦ Soltan )) (ʹ and (͵ǡ Dolni Věstonice ͵ǡ ͳ͵ǡ ͳͶǡ ͳͷǡ ͳ͸ǡ El Mirónǡ Grotte des Enfants Ͷǡ (ayonim ͺǡ ͳ͹ǡ ͳͻǡ ʹͲǡ ʹͷǡ ʹ͹ǡ ʹͻ and ʹͻaǡ )sturitz and ͳͳͷǡ Le Roc ͳ and ʹǡ Minat ͳǡ Moh 

Khiewǡ Muierii ͳǡ Nahal Oren ͸ǡ ͺǡ ͳͶ and ͳͺǡ Nazlet Khater ʹǡ Oase ͳǡ Oberkassel ͳ and ʹǡ 

Ohalo )) ͳ and ʹǡ Pavlov ͳǡ Předmostí ͵ and ʹͳǡ Sunghir ͳ and ͸ǡ Villabruna ͳ and 

Zhoukoudian Upper Cave ͳͲͳǡ ͳͲͶ and ͳͲͺǤ 

Dental metric and non-metric data (Extended Data Tables 3, 4 and 5) 

Crown metric and nonǦmetric data were collected from casts or originals with a few exceptions taken from the literatureǤ The latter includeǣ Mumba X)) ͳͲͲ Ǣ Eyasi ͳͲͳ ǢKapthurin ͳͲʹ Ǣ Olduvai ͳͲ͵ Ǣ Sima de los (uesos ͳͲ͵ Ǣ some Sangiran metric data ͳͲͶ Ǥ Root metric data were taken on ͵D models generated from microǦcomputed tomographic data ͳͲͷǡ ͳͲ͸ Ǥ Crown measurements were taken using Mitituyo digital calipersǤ NonǦmetric trait expressions were scored using the Arizona State University Dental Anthropology System ͳͲ͹ where applicable ȋLower dentitionǣ P Ͷ lingual cuspsǡ Cusp ͸ǡ Cusp ͹ǡ M ʹ groove patternǡ protostylidǢ for Upper dentitionǣ shovelingǡ tuberculum dentaleǡ canine distal accessory ridgeǡ Cusp ͷǡ Carabelliǯs traitǡ parastyleǡ metacone and hypocone reductionȌǡ and Bailey ͳͲͺ for all othersǤ RM( include individuals from Southǡ West and East Africaǡ Western and Central Europeǡ Northeast Asiaǡ West Asiaǡ )ndiaǡ Australiaǡ New Guinea and Andaman )slandsǤ For root metrics the sample composition is in Table ͳ from Le Cabec et al. ͳͲ͸ . H. erectus includes individuals from Zhoukoudianǡ Sangiranǡ West Turkanaǡ East Rudolfǡ Olduvai and DmanisiǤ MP African archaics ȋMPAfȌ include individuals from Thomas Quarriesǡ Saléǡ Florisbadǡ Rabatǡ (oedijiespuntǡ Cave of (earthsǡ Olduvaiǡ Kapthurinǡ Mumbaǡ Eyasiǡ Broken (ill and Sidi AbderrahmaneǤ MP European archaics ȋMPEȌ include individuals from Mauerǡ Aragoǡ Sima de los (uesosǡ Pontnewyddǡ Fontana RanuccioǤ Neanderthal samples include individuals from Amudǡ Arcy sur Cureǡ Cova Negraǡ Grotta Guattariǡ (ortusǡ Kalamakiaǡ Krapinaǡ Kebaraǡ Kulnaǡ La Quinaǡ La Fateǡ La Ferrassieǡ Le Moustierǡ Melpignanoǡ Monte Feneraǡ Monsempronǡ Montmaurinǡ Feldhoferǡ ObiǦRakhmatǡ Ochozǡ PechǦdeǦl̵Azéǡ Petit Puymoyenǡ Re gourdouǡ RocǦdeǦMarsalǡ Spyǡ SaintǦCésaireǡ Subalyukǡ Tabun and VindijaǤ EM( include individuals from Die Keldersǡ Equus Caveǡ Klasies River Mouthǡ Sea (arvestǡ (aua Fteahǡ Dar esǦSoltanǡ Contrebandiersǡ El (arhouraǡ Qafzehǡ and SkhulǤ 

͵ͳǤ Wollnyǡ GǤ et al. M)A Ǧ A free and open source software for gray scale medical image analysisǤ Source Code for Biology and Medicine 8ǡ ͳǦʹͲǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͳͺ͸Ȁͳ͹ͷͳǦͲͶ͹͵ǦͺǦʹͲ ȋʹͲͳ͵Ȍ ͵ʹǤ Booksteinǡ FǤ LǤ Landmark methods for forms without landmarksǣ morphometrics of group differences in outline shapeǤ Medical Image Analysis 1ǡ ʹʹͷǦʹͶ͵ ȋͳͻͻ͹Ȍ ͵͵Ǥ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Mitteroeckerǡ PǤ Ƭ Booksteinǡ FǤ LǤ Semilandmarks in three dimensionsǤ in Modern Morphometrics in Physical Anthropology. ȋed DǤEǤ SliceȌ ͹͵Ǧͻͺ ȋKluwer AcademicȀPlenum Publishersǡ ʹͲͲͷ Ȍ ͵ͶǤ Gunzǡ PǤ Ƭ Mitteroeckerǡ PǤ Semilandmarksǣ a method for quantifying curves and surfacesǤ Hystrix, the Intalian Journal of Mammalogy 24 ǡ ͳͲ͵ǦͳͲͻǡ doiǣdoiǣͳͲǤͶͶͲͶȀhystrixǦʹͶǤͳǦ͸ʹͻʹ ȋʹͲͳ͵Ȍ ͵ͷǤ Wileyǡ DǤ FǤ et al. in 16th IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS 2005) 55 ǡ Ͷ͵ͳǦ Ͷ͵ͺ ȋAmerican Journal of Physical Anthropologyǡ Minneapolisǡ MNǡ USAǡ ʹͲͲͷȌ ͵͸Ǥ Freidlineǡ SǤ EǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤǡ (arvatiǡ KǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ Middle Pleistocene human facial morphology in an evolutionary and developmental contextǤ Journal of Human Evolution 63 ǡ ͹ʹ͵Ǧ͹ͶͲǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͳ͸ȀjǤjhevolǤʹͲͳʹǤͲͺǤͲͲʹ ȋʹͲͳʹȌ ͵͹Ǥ Neubauerǡ SǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ The pattern of endocranial ontogenetic shape changes in humansǤ Journal of Anatomy 215 ǡ ʹͶͲǦʹͷͷ ȋʹͲͲͻȌ ͵ͺǤ (arvatiǡ KǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤ Ƭ Grigorescuǡ DǤ Cioclovina ȋRomaniaȌǣ affinities of an early modern EuropeanǤ Journal of Human Evolution 53 ǡ ͹͵ʹǦ͹Ͷ͸ǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͳ͸ȀjǤjhevolǤʹͲͲ͹ǤͲͻǤͲͲͻ ȋʹͲͲ͹Ȍ ͵ͻǤ Benazziǡ SǤ et al. Early dispersal of modern humans in Europe and implications for Neanderthal behaviourǤ Nature 479 ǡ ͷʹͷǦͷʹͺǡ ȋʹͲͳͳȌ ͶͲǤ Baileyǡ SǤ EǤǡ Benazziǡ SǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ Allometryǡ merismǡ and tooth shape of the upper deciduous Mʹ and permanent MͳǤ American Journal of Physical Anthropology 154 ǡ ͳͲͶǦͳͳͶǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͲʹȀajpaǤʹʹͶ͹͹ ȋʹͲͳͶȌ ͶͳǤ Benazziǡ SǤ et al. Cervical and crown outline analysis of worn Neander thal and modern human lower second deciduous molarsǤ American Journal of Physical Anthropology 149 ǡ ͷ͵͹ǦͷͶ͸ǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͲʹȀajpaǤʹʹͳͷͷ ȋʹͲͳʹȌ ͶʹǤ Skinnerǡ MǤ MǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Woodǡ BǤ AǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ EnamelǦdentine junction ȋEDJȌ morphology distinguishes the lower molars of Australopithecus africanus and Paranthropus robustusǤ Journal of Human Evolution 55 ǡ ͻ͹ͻǦ ͻͺͺ ȋʹͲͲͺȌ Ͷ͵Ǥ Skinnerǡ MǤ MǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Woodǡ BǤ AǤǡ Boeschǡ CǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤ JǤ Discrimination of extant Pan species and subspecies using the enamelǦdentine junction morphology of lower molarsǤ American Journal Of Physical Anthropology 

140 ǡ ʹ͵ͶǦʹͶ͵ ȋʹͲͲͻȌ ͶͶǤ Spoorǡ FǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Neubauerǡ SǤǡ Stelzerǡ SǤǡ Scottǡ NǤǡ Kwekasonǡ AǤǡ and DeanǤ CǤǡ ʹͲͳͷǤ Reconstructed homo habilis type O( ͹ suggests deepǦrooted species diversity in early homoǤ Nature ͷͳͻ ȋ͹ͷͶͳȌǣ ͺ͵Ǧ͸ ȋʹͲͳͷȌ ͶͷǤ Beucherǡ SǤ Ƭ Lantuéjoulǡ CǤ in International workshop on image processing: real-time edge and motion detection ǡ ʹǤͳǦʹǤͳʹ ȋRennesǡ Franceǡ ͳͻ͹ͻȌ Ͷ͸Ǥ Le Cabecǡ AǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Kupczikǡ KǤǡ Bragaǡ JǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ Anterior tooth root morphology and size in Neanderthalsǣ Taxonomic and functional implicationsǤ Journal of Human Evolution 64 ǡ ͳ͸ͻǦͳͻ͵ǡ doiǣhttpǣȀȀdxǤdoiǤorgȀͳͲǤͳͲͳ͸ȀjǤjhevolǤʹͲͳʹǤͲͺǤͲͳͳ ȋʹͲͳ͵Ȍ Ͷ͹Ǥ Mitteroeckerǡ PǤ Ƭ Gunzǡ PǤ Advances in Geometric morphometricsǤ 

Evolutionary Biology 36 ǡ ʹ͵ͷǦʹͶ͹ ȋʹͲͲͻȌ ͶͺǤ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Mitteroeckerǡ PǤǡ Neubauerǡ SǤǡ Weberǡ GǤ WǤ Ƭ Booksteinǡ FǤ LǤ Principles for the virtual reconstruction of hominin craniaǤ Journal of 

Human Evolution 57 ǡ ͶͺǦ͸ʹ ȋʹͲͲͻȌ ͶͻǤ Rohlfǡ FǤ JǤ Ƭ Sliceǡ DǤ Extensions of the Procrustes Method for the Optimal Superimposition of LandmarksǤ Systematic Zoology 39 ǡ ͶͲǦͷͻǡ doiǣͳͲǤʹ͵Ͳ͹ȀʹͻͻʹʹͲ͹ ȋͳͻͻͲȌ ͷͲǤ Mitteroeckerǡ PǤ Ƭ Booksteinǡ FǤ Linear Discriminationǡ Ordinationǡ and the Visualization of Selection Gradients in Modern MorphometricsǤ Evolutionary Biology 38 ǡ ͳͲͲǦͳͳͶǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͲ͹Ȁsͳͳ͸ͻʹǦͲͳͳǦͻͳͲͻǦͺ ȋʹͲͳͳȌ    

> ͷͳǤ R Development Core TeamǤ Rǣ a language and environment for statistical computingǤ R Foundation for Statistical Computingǡ Viennaǡ AustriaǤ httpǣȀȀwwwǤrǦ
> projectǤorg ȋʹͲͳʹȌ

ͷʹǤ Arambourgǡ CǤǡ Bibersonǡ PǤ The fossil human remains from the Paleolithic site of Sidi Abderrahman ȋMoroccoȌǤ Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 14 ǡ Ͷ͸͹ǦͶͺͻ ȋͳͻͷ͸Ȍ ͷ͵Ǥ Sausseǡ FǤ La mandibule atlanthropienne de la carrière Thomas ) ȋCasablancaȌǤ Anthropologie 79 ǡ ͺͳǦͳͳʹ ȋͳͻ͹ͷȌ ͷͶǤ Deaconǡ (Ǥ JǤ Comparative studies of Late Pleistocene human remains from Klasies River Mouthǡ South AfricaǤ J. Hum. Evol. 20 ǡ ͳ͵ͳǦͳͷ͸ ȋͳͻͻͳȌ ͷͷǤ Stewartǡ ThǤ DǤ The skull of Shanidar ))Ǥ )nǣ Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution ǡ ͷʹͳǦͷ͵͵ ȋͳͻ͸ʹȌ ͷ͸Ǥ Tillierǡ AǤǦMǤ La mandibule et les dentsǤ )nǣ Le Squelette moustÈrien de KÈbara 2 ǡ ͻ͹Ǧͳͳ ȋͳͻͻͳȌ ͷ͹Ǥ Stewartǡ TǤ DǤ The Neanderthal Skeletal Remains from Shanidar Caveǡ )raqǣ A Summary of Findings to DateǤ Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 121 ǡ ͳʹͳǦͳ͸ͷ ȋͳͻ͹͹Ȍ ͷͺǤ Trinkausǡ EǤǡ The Shanidar Neanderthals. Academic Pressǡ New YorkǤ ȋͳͻͺ͵Ȍ ͷͻǤ LeroiǦGourhanǡ AǤ …tude des restes humains fossiles provenant des Grottes d'Arcy-sur-Cure Ǥ Masson et Cieǡ ParisǤ ȋͳͻͷͺȌ ͸ͲǤ Dauraǡ JǤǡ Sanzǡ MǤǡ Subiráǡ MǤ EǤǡ Quamǡ RǤǡ Fullolaǡ JǤ MǤǡ Ƭ Arsuagaǡ JǤ LǤǡ A Neandertal mandible from the Cova del Gegant ȋSitgesǡ Barcelonaǡ SpainȌǤ J. Hum. Evol Ǥǡ 49 ǡ ͷ͸Ǧ͹Ͳ ȋʹͲͲͷȌ ͸ͳǤ Topinardǡ PǤǡ Les caracteres simiens de la machoire de la NauletteǤ Revue d'anthropologie 15 ǡ ͵ͺͷǦͶ͵ͳ ȋͳͺͺ͸Ȍ  

> ͸ʹǤ

Blakeǡ CǤ CǤ On a (uman Jaw from the Cave of La Nauletteǡ near DinantǡBelgiumǤ Anthropological Review 5ǡ ʹͻͶǦ͵Ͳ͵ ȋͳͺ͸͹Ȍ  

> ͸͵Ǥ

Leguebeǡ AǤǡ Toussaintǡ MǤǡ La mandibule et les cubitus de la Nauletteǣ morphologie et morphométrieǤ Editions du Centre national de la recherche scientifique 15, ȋͳͻͺͺȌ  

> ͸ͶǤ

(eimǡ JǤ LǤ Les hommes fossiles de La Ferrassie ȋDordogneȌ et le probleme de la definition des Neandertaliens classiquesǤ )))Ǥ Squelette cÈphalique. LíAnthropologie 78 ǡ ͵ʹͳǦ͵͹ͺ ȋͳͻ͹ͶȌ  

> ͸ͷǤ

Lumleyǡ MǤǦAǤ Les NÈandertaliens de la grotte de l'Hortus. Etudes Quaternaires 1 ǡ ͵͹ͷǦ͵ͺͷǡ ȋͳͻ͹ʹȌ  

> ͸͸Ǥ

Condemiǡ SǤǡ Mounierǡ AǤǡ Giuntiǡ PǤǡ Lariǡ MǤǡ Caramelliǡ DǤǡ Ƭ Longoǡ LǤǡ Possible )nterbreeding in Late )talian Neanderthalsǫ New Data from the Mezzena Jaw ȋMonti Lessiniǡ Veronaǡ )talyȌǤ PloS one, 8ǡ eͷͻ͹ͺͳǡ ȋʹͲͳ͵Ȍ  

> ͸͹Ǥ

Corrainǡ CǤ Resti scheletrici umani del ̵ Riparo Mez zena̵Ǥ Memorie del Museo civico di Storia naturale di Verona 16 ǡ ͻ͹ǦͳͲͳ ȋͳͻ͸ͺȌ  

> ͸ͺǤ

Walkerǡ MǤ JǤǡ Lombardiǡ VǤ AǤǡ Zapataǡ JǤǡ Trinkausǡ EǤ Neandertal mandibles from the Sima de las Palomas del Cabezo Gordoǡ Murciaǡ southeastern SpainǤ 

Am. J. of Phys. Anthropol Ǥ 142 ǡ ʹ͸ͳǦʹ͹ʹ ȋʹͲͳͲȌ  

> ͸ͻǤ

Martinǡ (Ǥ Machoire humaine moustérienne trouvée dans la station de La QuinaǤ Líhomme prÈhistorique 13 ǡ ͵Ǧʹͳ ȋͳͻʹ͸Ȍ  

> ͹ͲǤ

Martinǡ (Ǥ Position stratigraphique des Ossements humains recueillis dans le Moustérien de La Quina de ͳͻͲͺ à ͳͻͳʹǤ Bulletin de la SociÈtÈ prÈhistorique de France 9ǡ ͹ͲͲǦ͹Ͳͻ ȋͳͻͳʹȌ  

> ͹ͳǤ

Martinǡ (Ǥ L'Homme fossile de la Quina Ǥ Libraire Octave Doinǡ ParisǤ ȋͳͻʹ͵Ȍ  

> ͹ʹǤ

Papǡ )Ǥǡ Tillierǡ AǤ MǤǡ Arensburgǡ BǤǡ Chechǡ MǤ The Subalyuk Neanderthal remains ȋ(ungaryȌǣ a reǦexaminationǤ Annales Historico Naturales-Musei 

Nationalis Hungarici 88 ǡ ʹ͵͵Ȃʹ͹Ͳ ȋͳͻͻ͸Ȍ  

> ͹͵Ǥ

Sanchezǡ FǤǡ Comparative biometrical study of the Mousterian mandible from Cueva del Boquete de Zafarraya ȋMálagaǡ SpainȌǤ Human Evolution 14 ǡͳʹͷǦͳ͵ͺ ȋͳͻͻͻȌ  

> ͹ͶǤ

Vlčekǡ EǤ Fossile Menschenfunde von WeimarǦEhringsdorfǤ Weimarer Monographien zur Ur- und Fr¸hgeschichte, 30 ǡ ȋͳͻͻ͵Ȍ  

> ͹ͷǤ

Condemiǡ SǤ Les nÈandertaliens de La Chaise: abri Bourgeois-Delaunay. 

ComitÈ des travaux historiques et scientifiques-CTHS ȋʹͲͲͳȌ  

> ͹͸Ǥ

BarǦYosefǡ OǤǡ Ƭ Vandermeerschǡ BǤ ȋEdsǤȌǤ Le squelette moustÈrien de KÈbara 

2. Editions du Centre national de la recherche scientifique. ȋͳͻͻͳȌ  

> ͹͹Ǥ

Arambourgǡ CǤǡ Ƭ (offstetterǡ RǤ Le gisement de Ternifine ȋVolǤ ͳȌǤ Massonǡ ParisǤ ȋͳͻ͸͵Ȍ  

> ͹ͺǤ

(ootonǡ EǤAǤǡ (enckenǡ (ǤOǤǡ Snowǡ ChǤ EǤ The ancient Palestinian: Skh ūl V 

reconstruction. American school of prehistoric research . 17 ǡ ͷǦͳͲ ȋͳͻͷ͵Ȍ  

> ͹ͻǤ

Rightmireǡ GǤ PhǤǡ Deaconǡ (Ǥ JǤ Comparative studies of Late Pleistocene human remains from Klasies River Mouthǡ South AfricaǤ J. Hum. Evol. 20 ǡͳ͵ͳǦͳͷ͸ ȋͳͻͻͳȌ ͺͲǤ Sollasǡ WǤ JǤ The Chancelade SkullǤ The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 57 ǡ ͺͻǦͳʹʹ ȋͳͻʹ͹Ȍ  

> ͺͳǤ

Martinǡ (Ǥ Caractères des squelettes humains quaternaires de la vallée du Roc ȋCharenteȌǤRace de ChanceladeǤ Bulletins et memoires de la SociÈtÈ d'anthropologie de Paris. 8ǡ ͳͲ͵Ǧͳʹͻ ȋͳͻʹ͹Ȍ  

> ͺʹǤ

Vercellottiǡ GǤǡ Alciatiǡ GǤǡ Richardsǡ MǤ PǤǡ Ƭ Formicolaǡ VǤ The Late Upper Paleolithic skeleton Villabruna ͳ ȋ)talyȌǣ a source of data on biology and behavior of a ͳͶǤͲͲͲ yearǦold hunterǤ J Anthropol Sci ǡ 86 ǡ ͳͶ͵Ǧͳ͸͵ ȋʹͲͲͺȌ  

> ͺ͵Ǥ

Formicolaǡ VǤ Una mandibola umana dal deposito dell̵Epigravetti ano finale delle Arene Candite ȋscavi ͳͻ͹OȌǤ Rivista di antropologia 64 ǡ ʹ͹ͳǦʹ͹ͺ ȋͳͻͺ͸Ȍ  

> ͺͶǤ

Odanoǡ AǤ MǤǡ Riquetǡ RǤ Le gisement préhistorique de DarǦesǦSoltane ʹǤ Champ de tir de El Menzeh à Rabat ȋMarocȌǤ Note préliminaireǤ ʹǦÉtude anthropologique des restes postǦatériensǤ Bull. d'ArchÈologie Marocaine 11 ǡʹͷǦ͸͵ ȋͳͻ͹ͺȌ  

> ͺͷǤ

Debénathǡ AǤ Nouveaux restes humains atériens du MarocǤ CR Acad. Sci. 

Paris 290 ǡ ͺͷͳǦͺͷʹ ȋͳͻͺͲȌ  

> ͺ͸Ǥ

Crognierǡ EǤǡ DupouyǦMadreǡ MǤ Les Natoufiens du Nahal Oren ȋOuadi FallahȌ Etude anthropologiqueǤ PalÈorient 2ǡ ͳͲ͵Ǧͳʹͳ ȋͳͻ͹ͶȌ  

> ͺ͹Ǥ

(enkeǡ WǤ VergleichendǦmorphologische Kennzeichnung der Jungpaläolithiker von Oberkassel bei BonnǤ Zeitschrift f¸r Morphologie und Anthropologie 75 ǡ ʹ͹ǦͶͶ ȋͳͻͺͶȌ  

> ͺͺǤ

(ershkovitzǡ )Ǥ Ohalo )) (ʹǣ a ͳͻǡͲͲͲǦyearǦold skeleton from a waterǦlogged site at the Sea of Galileeǡ )sraelǤ Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 96 ǡ ʹͳͷǦʹ͵Ͷ ȋͳͻͻͷȌ  

> ͺͻǤ

Soficaruǡ AǤǡ Dobosǡ AǤǡ Trinkausǡ EǤ Early modern humans from the Pestera Muieriiǡ Baia de Fierǡ RomaniaǤ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 ǡ ͳ͹ͳͻ͸Ǧͳ͹ʹͲͳ ȋʹͲͲ͸Ȍ  

> ͻͲǤ

Crevecoeurǡ ) . Etude anthropologique des restes humains de Nazlet Khater 

(PalÈolithique Superieur, Egypte). PhD Thesisǡ Université Sciences et Technologies Ǧ Bordeaux )Ǥ ȋʹͲͲ͸Ȍ  

> ͻͳǤ

Thomaǡ AǤ Morphology and affinities of the Nazlet Khater manǤ J. Hum. Evol Ǥ

13 ǡ ʹͺ͹Ǧʹͻ͸Ǥ ȋͳͻͺͶȌ  

> ͻʹǤ

Andersonǡ JǤ EǤ Late Paleolithic skeletal remains from NubiaǤ The prehistory of Nubia vol. 2 ȋedǤ Wendorfǡ FǤȌ ͻͻ͸ǦͳͲͶͲ ȋDallasǡ Fort Burgwin Research Center Ƭ Southern Methodist University Pressǡͳͻ͸ͺȌ  

> ͻ͵Ǥ

Crevecoeurǡ )Ǥ From the Nile to the Danubeǣ a comparison of the Nazlet Khater ʹ and Oase ͳ early modern human mandiblesǤ Anthropologie (Brno) 

42 ǡ ʹͲ͵Ǧʹͳ͵ ȋʹͲͲͶȌ  

> ͻͶǤ

Trinkausǡ EǤ etǤalǤ An early modern human from the Peştera cu Oaseǡ RomaniaǤ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ǡ 100 ǡ ͳͳʹ͵ͳǦ ͳͳʹ͵͸ ȋʹͲͲ͵Ȍ  

> ͻͷǤ

Trinkausǡ EǤǡ Svobodaǡ JǤ Early modern human evolution in Central Europe: the people of DolnÌ V ěstonice and Pavlov. The Dolni Vestonice Studies volǤ ͳʹǤ ȋNew Yorkǡ Oxford University Pressǡ ʹͲͲ͸Ȍ  

> ͻ͸Ǥ

Sládekǡ VǤǡ Trinkausǡ EǤǡ (illsonǡ SǤ WǤǡ Ƭ (ollidayǡ TǤ W . The people of the 

Pavlovian. Skeletal catalogue and osteometrics of the Gravettian fossil hominids from Dolni Vestonice and Pavlov Ǥ Dolni Vestonice Studieǡ Svazek ͷǡ ͳǦʹͶͶǤ ȋʹͲͲͲȌ ͻ͹Ǥ Drozdováǡ EǤ The evaluation of a rediscovered fragment of human lower jawǡ No ʹͳ from Předmostí u PřerovaǤ ArcheologickÈ rozhledy 53 ǡ ͶͷʹǦͶ͸Ͳ ȋʹͲͲͳȌ  

> ͻͺǤ

Dutourǡ OǤ Palimpseste paléoanthropologique sur lǯǼ(omme fossile dǯAsselarǽ ȋSaharaȌǤ Travaux du Laboratoire dǯAnthropologie et de Préhistoire des Pays de la Méditerranée Occidentale ͳǡ ͹͵Ȃͺ͵ ȋͳͻͻʹȌǤ  

> ͻͻǤ

Gambierǡ DǤ Vestiges humains du gisement d̵)sturitz ȋPyrénéesǦ AtlantiquesȌǣ étude anthropologique et analyse des traces d̵act ion humaine intentionelleǤ AntiquitÈs nationales 22-23, ͻǦʹ͸ ȋͳͻͻͲȌ  

> ͳͲͲǤ

Bräuerǡ GǤ Ƭ Mehlmanǡ MǤ JǤ (ominid molars from a Middle Stone Age level at Mumba Rock Shelterǡ TanzaniaǤ Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 75 ǡ ͸ͻǦ͹͸ ȋͳͻͺͺȌǤ  

> ͳͲͳǤ

Protschǡ RǤ RǤ RǤ Di Arch‰ologischen und Anthropologischen Ergebnisse der Kohl-Larsen-Expeditionen in Nord-Tanzania 1933-1939 Ǥ ȋ)nstitut f“r Urgeschichte der Universität T“bingenǡ ͳͻͺͳȌǤ  

> ͳͲʹǤ

Woodǡ BǤ AǤ Ƭ van Notenǡ FǤ LǤ Preliminary observations on the BK ͺͷͳͺ mandible from Baringoǡ KenyaǤ Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 69 ǡ ͳͳ͹Ǧͳʹ͹ǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͲʹȀajpaǤͳ͵͵Ͳ͸ͻͲͳͳ͵ ȋͳͻͺ͸ȌǤ  

> ͳͲ͵Ǥ

Rightmireǡ GǤ PǤ Middle Pleistocene hominids from Olduvai Gorgeǡ Northern TanzaniaǤ Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 53 ǡ ʹʹͷǦʹͶͳǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͲʹȀajpaǤͳ͵͵Ͳͷ͵ͲʹͲ͹ ȋͳͻͺͲȌǤ  

> ͳͲͶǤ

Bermúdez de Castroǡ JǤ MǤ Dental remains from Atapuerca ȋSpainȌ )Ǥ MetricsǤ 

Journal of Human Evolution 15 ǡ ʹ͸ͷǦʹͺ͹ ȋͳͻͺ͸ȌǤ  

> ͳͲͷǤ

Grineǡ FǤ EǤ Ƭ Franzenǡ JǤ LǤ Fossil hominid teeth from the Sangiran Dome ȋJavaǡ )ndonesiaȌǤ Courier Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg 171 ǡ ͹ͷǦͳͲ͵ ȋͳͻͻͶȌǤ  

> ͳͲ͸Ǥ

Le Cabecǡ AǤǡ Gunzǡ PǤǡ Kupczikǡ KǤǡ Bragaǡ JǤ Ƭ (ublinǡ JǤǦJǤ Anterior Tooth Root Morphology and Size in Neanderthalsǣ Taxonomic and Functional )mplicationsǤ J. Hum. Evol. 64 ǡ ͳ͸ͻǦͳͻ͵ǡ doiǣͳͲǤͳͲͳ͸ȀjǤjhevolǤ ʹͲͳʹǤͲͺǤͲͳͳ ȋʹͲͳ͵ ȌǤ  

> ͳͲ͹Ǥ

Turner CGǡ ))ǡ Nichol CRǡ and Scott GRǤ ͳͻͻͳǤ Scoring procedures for key morphological traits of the permanent dentitionǣ The Arizona State University Dental Anthropology SystemǤ )nǣ Kelley Mǡ and Larsen Cǡ editorsǤ Advances in Dental AnthropologyǤ New Yorkǣ Wiley LissǤ p ͳ͵Ǧ͵ͳǤ  

> ͳͲͺǤ

Bailey SEǤ ʹͲͲʹǤ Neandertal Dental Morphologyǣ )mplications for modern human origins ȏPhǤDǤ DissertationȐǤ Tempeǣ Arizona State UniversityǤ ʹ͵ͺ pǤ Figure captions 

Figure 1 | Facial reconstruction of Irhoud 10 , frontal (a) and basal (b) views. This Procrustes superimposition of Irhoud 10 (beige) and Irhoud 1 (light blue) represents one possible alignment of the facial bones of Irhoud 10. Multiple alternative reconstructions ( n=9) were included in the statistical shape analysis of the face (see Methods and Figure 3). The maxilla, zygomatic bone and supra-orbital area on Irhoud 10 are more robust than on Irhoud 1. Scale is 20 mm. 

Figure 2 | Irhoud 11 mandibule (lateral and cranial views). See Methods for the reconstruction. The bi-condylar breadth of the Irhoud 11 mandible exactly fits the width of the corresponding areas on the Irhoud 2 skull. Scale is 20 mm. 

Figure 3 | Comparative shape analysis . a, PCA of the facial shape. EMH and RMH are well separated from Neanderthals and archaic MP hominins. Irhoud 1 and all nine alternative reconstructions of Irhoud 10 (pink stars and pink 99% confidence ellipse, see Methods) fall within the RMH variation. b, PCA of endocranial shape. RMH (blue), Neanderthals (red) and 

Homo erectus (green) are separated. Archaic MP Hominins (orange) plot with Neanderthals. Irhoud 1 and 2 (pink stars) and some EMH (black) fall outside the RMH variation. Shape differences are visualized in Extended Data Figure 5a. Sample compositions and abbreviations are in Methods. Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Extended Data Figure Captions 

Extended Data Table 1| List of hominin specimens. Starting with the 2004 excavation, specimens were given ID numbers from the project catalogue. Layer 18 of the excavation by de Bayle des Hermens and Tixier 6 corresponds to Layer 7 of the 2004-2011 excavation. 

Extended Data Table 2| Measurements of the Irhoud 11 mandible after reconstruction. They are compared to those of five groups of fossil hominins. Values in mm. x犀 = mean value, j =standard deviation, n= sample size. The value with ì?î is an estimate. Data sources and sample compositions are in Methods. 

Extended Data Table 3| Dental measurements (upper dentition) BL = Bucco-lingual width, MD = Mesio-distal length. Values in mm. x甫 = mean value; minimum and maximum values are between square brackets; ゝ = standard deviation; n= sample size. Values in parentheses represent uncorrected measurements on worn or cracked teeth. Data sources and sample compositions are in Methods. 

Extended Data Table 4| Dental measurements (lower dentition). BL = Bucco-lingual width, MD = Mesio-distal length, RL = Root Length. All values in mm. x甫 = mean value; minimum and maximum values are between square brackets; ゝ = standard deviation; n= size of the sample. Values in parentheses represent uncorrected measurements on worn or cracked teeth. Data sources and sample compositions are in Methods. 

Extended Data Table 5| Morphological dental trait comparison 

Numbers given are trait frequencies score at the enamel surface. Sample sizes are in brackets. Data sources and sample compositions are in Methods. 

Extended Data Figure 1 | Mandibular morphology. a, Symphyseal section of Irhoud 11 mandible showing the mental angle. b, Mental area of Irhoud 11 before virtual reconstruction (top) and Irhoud 3 (bottom). Both figures are surface models generated from micro CT data. 

c, Bivariate plot of mandibular corpus breadth versus height at the mental foramen. Values in mm. Irhoud 11 plots with EMH and displays one of the largest corpus height among middle to late Pleistocene hominins. ìnî indicates sample size. Data sources and sample compositions are in Methods. 

Extended Data Figure 2 | a, shapeñspace PCA plot of late early and middle Pleistocene archaic Homo , Neanderthals and RMH M 1 crown outlines . The deformed mean crown outlines in the four directions of the PCs are drawn at the extremity of each axis. Sample compositions and abbreviations are in Methods. b, Enamel-dentine junction (EDJ) morphology of the M 2 and P 4. At top left a PCA analysis of EDJ shape of the M 2 places Irhoud 11 intermediate between H. erectus and RMH (along with other north Africa fossil humans) and distinct from Neanderthals. Surface models illustrate EDJ shape changes along PC1 (bottom left) and PC2 (top right); the former separating H. erectus from RMH, Neanderthals and North African EMH and the latter separating Neanderthals from RMH and north African EMH. At bottom right a PCA analysis of EDJ shape of the P 4 groups Irhoud 11 with modern and fossil humans. 

Extended Data Figure 3 | Shape analysis of I 2 roots . A between-group PCA shows a complete separation between Neanderthals and a worldwide sample of recent modern humans based on subtle shape differences. Irhoud 11 (magenta) plots at the fringes of RMH, close to the EMH from Temara. Colour-coded Procrustes group mean shapes are plotted in the same orientation as the I 2 root surface of Irhoud 11. Although Irhoud 11 is more similar, overall, to Neanderthals in terms of root size, its root shape is clearly modern. The Homo erectus s.l. 

specimen KNM-WT 15000 and hypothetical EMH Tabun C2 have incisor root shapes similar to Neanderthals, suggesting that roots that are labially more convex than in RMH represent a conserved primitive condition with limited taxonomical value. Sample compositions and abbreviations are in Methods. 

Extended Data Figure 4 | Shape analysis of external vault. a , Principal component (PC) scores 1 vs. 2 of external braincase shape in Homo erectus , MP archaic Homo , a geographically diverse RMH and Neanderthals. Results are consistent with the analysis of endocranial shape (Figure 3a). However, several EMH and Upper Palaeolithic specimens fall outside the RMH variation. This is likely due to the projecting supraorbital tori in these specimens. b, Shape changes associated with PC 1 (two standard deviations in either direction) shown as thin-plate spline deformation grids in lateral and oblique view. PC 1 captures a contrast between elongated braincases with projecting supraorbital tori (low scores in black), and a more globular braincase with gracile supraorbital tori (high scores in red). Sample compositions and abbreviations are in Methods. 

Extended Data Figure 5 | Facial and endocranial shape differences among Homo groups. 

Visualizations of GMM shape analyses in Figure 3. a, Average endocranial shape differences 

Homo erectus , recent Homo sapiens , and Neanderthals. Thin-plate spline (TPS) grids are exaggerated. b, Visualisation of shape changes along principal component (PC) 1 in Figure 3b in frontal, lateral and superior view; two standard deviations in either direction from the mean shape (grey, negative; black: positive). c, Shape changes along PC 2. All recent and fossil modern humans (low scores along PC 2) share smaller, orthognathic faces, that differ from the larger, robust and prognathic faces of the middle Pleistocene humans and Neanderthals (high scores along PC 1). Arrow length is colour coded (short: blue; long: red). As these visualisations are affected by the Procrustes superimposition, we also show TPS-grids in the 

maxilla and the supraorbital area. The arrow points to the plane of the maxillary TPS (red) in the template configuration. Specimens Item ID Anatomical part Year Stratigraphic position 

Irhoud 1 No ID Cranium 1961 Lower deposits 4

Irhoud 2 No ID Cranium 1962 Lower deposits 4

Irhoud 3 No ID Mandible (juvenile) 1968 Lower deposits 5

Irhoud 4 No ID Humerus (juvenile) 1969 Layer 18 of Tixier 6

Irhoud 5 No ID Coxal (juvenile) 1969 Layer 18 of de Bayle des Hermens & Tixier 7

Irhoud 6 No ID Mandible fragment 1961-69 Identified among faunal remains 

Irhoud 7 4766 Lower right P3 2004 Initial cleaning 

Irhoud 8 4767 Distal part of left lower molar 2004 Initial cleaning 

Irhoud 9 1653 Lower Molar (M1 or M2) 2006 Layer 4 

Irhoud 10 1678, 1679, 1680, 2178, 2259 Cranium 2007 Layer 7 

Irhoud 11 4765 + 3752 Mandible 2007 Layer 7 

Irhoud 12 2196 Lower incisor 2007 Layer 7 

Irhoud 13 2252 Left proximal Femur 2007 Layer 7 

Irhoud 14 2381, 2383 Rib 2009 Layer 7 

Irhoud 15 2401 Rib 2009 Layer 7 

Irhoud 16 2561, 2565 Humerus (juvenile) 2009 Layer 7 

Irhoud 17 2670 Right proximal Femur 2009 Layer 7 

Irhoud 18 2838 Lumbar vertebra 2007 Initial cleaning 

Irhoud 19 3747, 3748, 3749 Fibula 2009 Layer 7 

Irhoud 20 3751 Cervical vertebra 2009 Initial cleaning 

Irhoud 21 4200 Maxilla 2011 Layer A 

Irhoud 22 4502, 4503 M2 and M3 sup 2011 Layer A 

Extended Data Table 1 Measurement Irhoud 11 

African and European archaic MP 

Asian Neanderthals 

European Neanderthals 

Early modern humans 

Upper Palaeolithic MH 

Symphyseal Height 45 

x犀 = 31.53 

j = 3.7 n = 13 

x犀 = 36.1 

j = 3.36 n = 6 

x犀 = 33.98 

j = 4.64 n = 21 

x犀 = 36.36 

j = 6.03 n = 8 

x犀 = 31.87 

j = 2.82 n = 38 

Corpus Height at Mental Foramen 38.4 

x犀 = 30.69 

j =4.2 n = 19 

x犀 = 33.9 

j =3.51 n = 7 

x犀 = 31.22 

j = 3.43 n = 33 

x犀 = 34.23 

j = 4.57 n = 13 

x犀 = 30.89 

j = 3.11 n = 47 

Corpus Breadth at Mental Foramen 15.4 

x犀= 17.22 

j = 1.98 n = 19 

x犀 = 17.16 

j = 1.89 n = 7 

x犀 = 15.56 

j = 1.71 n = 33 

x犀 = 16.04 

j = 1.75 n = 13 

x犀 = 12.67 

j = 1.55 n = 48 

Corpus Height at M 1

36 

x犀 = 31.15 

j = 4.59 n = 15 

x犀 =31.65 

j = 3.17 n = 4 

x犀 = 30.82 

j = 3.36 n = 22 

x犀 = 32.81 

j = 5.64 n = 10 

x犀 = 29.51 

j = 2.19 n = 29 

Corpus Breadth at M 1

17.7 

x犀 = 17.57 

j = 2.4 n = 15 

x犀 = 17.54 

j = 2.67 n = 5 

x犀 = 16.7 

j = 1.75 n = 22 

x犀 = 17.11 

j = 2.57 n = 11 

x犀 = 14.25 

j = 1.57 n = 26 

Corpus Height at M 1/M 2

34 

x犀 = 30.82 

j = 4.21 n = 15 

x犀 = 32.40 

j = 1.65 n = 3 

x犀 = 29.64 

j = 3.21 n = 23 

x犀 = 32.88 

j = 4.26 n = 8 

x犀 = 28.64 

j = 2.3 n = 33 

Corpus Breadth at M 1/M 2

19.3 

x犀 = 18.03 

j = 2.98 n = 15 

x犀 = 17.57 

j = 2.25 n = 3 

x犀 = 16.35 

j = 1.56 n = 22 

x犀 = 17.56 

j = 2.43 n = 8 

x犀 = 14.73 

j = 1.92 n = 34 

Corpus Height at M 2

31,5 

x犀 = 30.42 

j =3.97 n = 20 

x犀 = 31.75 

j = 3.82 n = 6 

x犀 = 30.10 

j = 3.4 n = 26 

x犀 = 32.41 

j = 5.22 n = 8 

x犀 = 27.04 

j = 2.58 n = 34 

Corpus Breath at M 2

22.7 

x犀 = 18.45 

j = 2.45 n =20 

x犀 = 17.6 

j = 1.54 n = 7 

x犀 = 16.03 

j = 1.78 n = 25 

x犀 = 18.48 

j = 2.93 n = 8 

x犀 = 15.02 

j = 1.89 n = 36 

Length of the Dental Arcade 66.5 

x犀 = 58.19 

j = 5.46 n = 11 

x犀 = 54.78 

j = 2.78 n = 4 

x犀 = 55.23 

j = 2.49 n = 10 

x犀 = 57.25 

j = 6.22 n = 4 

x犀 = 51.78 

j = 3.33 n = 26 

Bigonial Breadth 144 ? 

x犀= 96.93 x犀 = 102.13 x犀 = 92.57 x犀 = 93.75 x犀 = 98.59 

j = 11.84 j = 6.22 j = 11.62 j = 13.93 j = 9.67 

n = 6 n = 4 n = 6 n = 4 n = 29 

Bicanine Breadth 38.5 

x犀 = 35.54 x犀 = 36.48 x犀 = 36.62 x犀 = 38.0 x犀 = 32.64 

j = 3.79 j = 1.63 j = 2.45 j = 2.00 j = 2.38 

n = 11 n = 6 n = 14 n = 5 n = 28 

Bi-M 2 Breadth 66.6 

x犀 = 66.13 x犀 = 72.1 x犀 = 69.86 x犀 = 68.46 x犀 = 61.75 

j = 5.81 j = 1.48 j = 3.23 j = 3.54 j = 3.88 

n = 11 n = 4 n = 11 n = 5 n = 26 

Bi-M 3 Breadth 70.9 

x犀 = 70.24 x犀 = 74.86 x犀 = 71.9 x犀 = 72.03 x犀 = 66.62 

j = 6.22 j = 2.78 j = 3.29 j = 4.16 j = 4.07 

n = 11 n = 5 n = 11 n = 4 n = 26 

Extended Data Table 2 Irhoud 10 Irhoud 21 Irhoud 22 H. erectus MPE MPAf Neanderthals EMH RMH 

Cí 

BL -- 9.8 --

x甫 = 10.3 [9.7-11.9] 

ゝ = 0.7 n=12 x甫 =9.8 [8.8-10.7] 

ゝ =0.7 n=6 x甫 = 9.7 [8.9-10.5] 

ゝ =1.1 n=2 x甫 = 10.0 [8.8-11.4] 

ゝ = 0.7 n=26 x甫 = 9.3 [8.5-10.4] 

ゝ = 0.6 n=11 x甫 = 8.3 [7.0-9.8] 

ゝ = 0.7 n =131 

MD -- 8.9 --

x甫 = 9.6 x甫 = 8.7 x甫 = 9.3 x甫 = 8.8 x甫 = 8.4 x甫 = 7.7 

[8.5-10.3] [7.7-9.9] [8.9-9.6] [7.0-10.0] [7.5-9.7] [6.2-8.8] 

ゝ = 0.6 n=11 ゝ = 0.8 n=7 ゝ = 0.5 n=2 ゝ = 0.6 n=24 ゝ = 0.6 n=10 ゝ = 0.5 n 122 

P3

BL -- 11.6 --

x甫 = 11.7 x甫 = 10.9 

--x甫 =10.7 x甫 =10.4 x甫 = 9.4 

[10.4-12.9] [10.5-12.1] [9.1-11.9] [10.0-11.1] [7.9-11.2] 

ゝ = 0.9 n=12 ゝ = 1.5 n=7 ゝ = 0.8 n=30 ゝ = 0.4 n=10 ゝ =0.7 n= 197 

MD -- 8.4 --

x甫 = 8.3 x甫 = 8.8 

--x甫 = 8.0 x甫 = 7.7 x甫 = 7.1 

[7.4-9.1] [8.0-10.7] [6.2-9.3] [7.0-8.7] [5.6-8.6] 

ゝ =0.5 n=14 ゝ = 0.9 n=7 ゝ = 0.7 n=29 ゝ = 0.6 n=10 ゝ = 0.6 n=186 

P4

BL -- 11.3 --

x甫 = 11.3 x甫 = 11.1 x犀 =11.3 x甫 = 10.5 x甫 = 10.4 x甫 = 9.5 

[9.9-13.4] [9.9-12.2] - [8.2-11.7] [9.7-11.5] [7.6-12.3] 

ゝ = 0.9 n=22 ゝ = 0.6 n=8 n=1 ゝ = 0.7 n=25 ゝ = 0.6 n=11 ゝ = 0.8 n=194 

MD -- 8.3 --

x甫 = 8.1 x甫 = 8.0 x犀 = 7.9 x甫 = 7.6 x甫 = 7.1 x甫 = 6.9 

[7.2-9.2] [7.3-8.4] - [5.7-8.8] [7.0-9.3] [5.4-11.3] 

ゝ = 0.6 n=21 ゝ = 0.4 n=7 n=1 ゝ = 0.9 n=25 ゝ = 0.8 n=12 ゝ = 0.8 n=173 

M1

BL 12.7 12.7 --

x甫 = 13.0 x甫 = 12.1 x甫 = 12.8 x甫 = 12.2 x甫 = 12.6 x甫 = 11.5 

[11.7-14.7] [10.9-14.4] [11.8-13.8] [11.2-14.2] [11.2-15.2] [9.8-13.6] 

ゝ = 0.9 n=18 ゝ = 1.1 n=10 ゝ = 1.0 n=3 ゝ = 0.8 n=24 ゝ = 1.3 n=22 ゝ = 0.7 n=313 

MD (12.1) 12.2 --

x甫 = 11.8 x甫 = 11.5 x甫 =12.4 x甫 = 11.5 x甫 = 11.5 x甫 = 10.7 

[10.0-13.6] [10.5-12.7] [10.0-12.4] [8.5-13.6] [9.9-13.9] [8.7-13.3] 

ゝ = 0.9 n=21 ゝ = 0.8 n=10 ゝ = 1.2 n=3 ゝ = 1.1 n=22 ゝ = 1.1 n=21 ゝ = 0.7 n=279 

M2

BL 12.3 12.4 13.8 

x甫 = 13.3 x甫 = 13.3 x甫 = 12.5 x甫 = 12.8 x甫 = 12.3 x甫 = 11.6 

[11.3-15.5] [11.3-16.3] [11.2-12.2] [11.2-16.2] [10.5-13.7] [9.1-14.1] 

ゝ = 1.2 n=12 ゝ = 1.3 n=10 ゝ = 0.5 n=4 ゝ = 1.1 n=25 ゝ = 1.0 n=12 ゝ =1.0 n= 229 

MD 10.9 11.8 12.6 

x甫 = 11.6 [10.2-13.6] 

ゝ =1.2 n=10 x甫 = 10.9 [9.7-12.4] 

ゝ = 0.9 n=9 x甫 = 11.1 [10.2-11.7] 

ゝ = 0.8 n=3 x甫 = 11.0 [9.3-13.1] 

ゝ = 1.1 n= 18 x甫 = 10.3 [8.6-11.8] 

ゝ = 0.8 n=9 x甫 = 9.9 [7.1-12.2] 

ゝ = 0.9 n= 199 

M3

BL -- 12.4 13.3 

x甫 = 12.2 x甫 = 11.9 x甫 = 11.5 x甫 = 12.3 x甫 = 11.7 x甫 = 11.1 

[10.4-15.3] [10.1-13.3] [11.0-11.9] [8.6-14.2] [9.7-13.5] [7.6-14.4] 

ゝ = 1.4 n=11 ゝ = 1.0 n=7 ゝ = 0.6 n=2 ゝ = 1.3 n=19 ゝ = 1.0 n=8 ゝ = 1.2 n=129 

MD -- 8.4 11.6 

x甫 = 10.0 x甫 = 9.0 x甫 = 10.0 x甫 = 10.4 x甫 = 9.3 x甫 = 8.9 

[8.7-12.4] [8.0-11.0] [9.8-10.2] [8.4-13.9] [8.6-10.9] [6.1-12.8] 

ゝ = 1.0 n=11 ゝ = 0.9 n=7 ゝ = 0.3 n=2 ゝ = 1.1 n=19 ゝ = 0.5 n=6 ゝ = 1.1 n=115 

Extended Data Table 3 Irhoud 3Irhoud 11 H. erectus MPE MPAf Neanderthals EMH RMH 

I1

BL -- 6.9 

x犀 =6.7 x犀 =6.9 x犀 =7.3 x犀 =7.4 x犀 = 6.6 x犀 = 5.8 

[6.4-6.9] [6.4-7.5] [7.2-7.4] [6.8-8.2] [5.8-7.6] [4.8-6.8] 

j =0.2 n = 3 j =0.4 n = 6 j =0.2 n = 2 j =0.4 n = 15 j = 0.6 n = 10 j = 0.4 n = 137 

MD -- (5.8) 

x犀 =6.1 x犀 =5.7 x犀 =6.2 x犀 =5.5 x犀 =5.6 x犀 = 5.4 

[5.8-6.6] [4.9-7.5] [5.9-6.4] [4.3-6.3] [4.5-6.8] [4.2-6.8] 

j =0.4 n = 3 j =0.5 n = 6 j =0.4 n = 2 j =0.5 n = 13 j = 0.9 n = 10 j = 0.4 n = 134 

RL -- 16.1 

x犀 =19.4 x犀 =16.5 

--

x犀 =17.2 x犀 =14.4 x犀 = 12.7 

- - [13.8-20.9] [13.7-16.6] [10.1-16.7] 

n = 1 n = 1 j = 1.9 n = 17 j =1.2 n =5 j = 1.5 n = 39 

I2

BL -- 7.6 

x犀 =7.2 x犀 =7.5 x犀 =7.8 x犀 =7.7 x犀 =7.1 x犀 = 6.2 

[6.8-8.3] [6.7-8.6] - [6.8-8.1] [6.4-8.0] [4.9-7.7] 

j =0.7 n = 4 j =0.6 n = 10 n = 1 j =0.3 n = 17 j =0.6 n =10 j = 0.5 n = 146 

MD -- (7.8) 

x犀 =7.4 x犀 =6.6 x犀 =7.4 x犀 =6.5 x犀 =6.6 x犀 = 6.0 

[7.2-7.9] [6.3-7.8] - [5.2-7.5] [5.7-7.8] [5.0-6.8] 

j =0.3 n = 3 j =0.4 n = 10 n = 1 j =0.5 n = 16 j =0.7 n =9 j = 0.5 n = 143 

RL -- 18.0 

x犀 =18.6 x犀 =16.7 

--

x犀 =18.4 x犀 =15.4 x犀 = 14.1 

[17.1-20.1] - [14.8-21.6] [13.7-17.3] [10.7-18.4] 

n = 2 n = 1 j =2.0 n = 15 j =1.6 n =6 j = 1.4 n = 47 

C, 

BL 9.1 9.4 

x犀 =8.8 x犀 =8.5 x犀 = 8.8 x犀 =9.2 x犀 =8.6 x犀 = 7.6 

[8.3-9.6] [5.9-9.8] [7.7-10.0] [7.8-10.3] [7.0-10.2] [6.0-9.4] 

j =0.5 n = 5 j =1.1 n = 11 j =1.6 n = 2 j =0.7 n = 24 j =0.9 n =12 j = 0.7 n = 132 

MD 9.1 8.6 

x犀 =8.4 x犀 =7.6 x犀 = 7.8 x犀 =8.0 x犀 =8.2 x犀 = 6.8 

[8.0-8.9] [6.7-8.7] [7.2-8.4] [6.9-9.0] [6.4-10.0] [5.4-8.1] 

j =0.4 n = 4 j =0.5 n = 11 j =0.9 n = 2 j =0.5 n = 22 j =1.0 n =10 j = 0.5 n = 124 

RL -- 20.6 --

x犀 =20.8 

--

x犀 =20.7 x犀 =17.8 x犀 = 16.6 

- [16.1-25.6] [16.1-19.8] [13.2-19.2] 

n = 1 j =3.0 n = 16 j =1.3 n =6 j = 1.8 n = 23 

P3

BL 10.2 9.6 

x犀 =10.3 x犀 =9.0 x犀 = 9.7 x犀 =9.1 x犀 =9.1 x犀 = 8.0 

[8.9-11.5] [8.4-10.0] [9.4-10.0] [7.2-10.3] [8.0-12.2] [6.4-10.2] 

j =0.9 n = 11 j =0.3 n = 9 j = 0.4 n = 2 j =0.7 n = 31 j = 1.2 n =10 j = 0.7 n = 173 

MD 9.7 9.2 

x犀 =8.8 x犀 =7.9 x犀 =9.4 x犀 =8.0 x犀 =8.2 x犀 = 7.1 

[7.9-9.9] [7.4-8.4] [8.8-10.0] [6.3-9.9] [7.2-11.0] [5.8-8.6] 

j =0.6 n = 11 j =0.3 n = 8 j =0.9 n = 2 j =0.7 n = 31 j =1.1 n =9 j = 0.6 n = 160 

P4

BL 10.5 10.5 

x犀 =10.6 x犀 =8.6 x犀 =9.9 x犀 =9.3 x犀 =9.3 x犀 = 8.4 

[9.6-11.7] [7.2-10.1] [8.7-11.1] [7.6-11.1] [7.8-10.9] [6.8-10.8] 

j =0.7 n = 12 j =0.9 n = 11 j =0.9 n = 5 j =0.8 n = 28 j = 0.9 n =16 j = 0.7 n = 165 

MD 9.5 8.9 

x犀 =8.7 x犀 = 7.4 x犀 =8.9 x犀 =7.9 x犀 =7.8 x犀 = 7.2 

[7.2-9.9] [6.6-9.5] [7.5-10.3] [5.7-11.8] [7.0-9.6] [5.6-10.4] 

j =0.8 n = 9 j =0.8 n = 11 j =0.9 n = 6 j =1.2 n = 23 j = 0.9 n =12 j = 0.7 n = 151 

M1

BL 12.3 12.2 

x犀 =12.2 x犀 =10.6 x犀 =11.7 x犀 =11.1 x犀 =11.7 x犀 = 10.7 

[10.7-13.5] [9.7-11.5] [10.5-12.6] [9.7-12.9] [10.5-14.3] [8.6-12.6] 

j =0.8 n = 15 j =0.6 n = 15 j =0.7 n = 7 j =0.7 n = 36 j = 1.0 n =19 j = 0.7 n = 267 

MD 14.5 12.5 

x犀 =13.3 x犀 =11.2 x犀 =12.8 x犀 =11.8 x犀 =12.6 x犀 = 11.4 

[12.1-14.9] [10.6-12.0] [11.9-13.8] [10.1-13.6] [10.8-14.2] [9.2-13.5] 

j =1.0 n = 13 j =0.5 n = 16 j =0.7 n = 8 j =0.9 n = 33 j = 1.0 n =20 j = 0.7 n = 243 

M2

BL 12.2 12.2 

x犀 =13.1 x犀 =10.4 x犀 =11.5 x犀 =11.1 x犀 =11.0 x犀 = 10.4 

[11.7-14.3] [8.6-12.4] [10.3-12.9] [9.6-12.4] [9.2-12.7] [8.6-12.5] 

j =0.8 n = 14 j =0.9 n = 17 j =0.9 n = 6 j =0.7 n = 32 j = 1.0 n =22 j = 0.8 n = 207 

MD (15.3) 13.0 

x犀 =13.3 x犀 =11.5 x犀 =12.8 x犀 =12.0 x犀 =11.7 x犀 = 10.9 

[12.5-14.4] [9.7-14.8] [12.0-13.8] [10.5-14.0] [10.2-14.2] [8.9-14.3] 

j =0.6 n = 12 j =1.3 n = 17 j =0.7 n = 6 j =0.9 n = 29 j =1.1 n =15 j = 0.9 n = 198 

M3

BL -- 11.1 

x犀 =12.4 x犀 =10 x犀 =11.4 x犀 =10.8 x犀 =10.8 x犀 = 10.4 

[11.0-14.2] [8.7-11.3] [10.6-12.3] [7.9-13.1] [9.2-12.8] [8.6-12.6] 

j =0.9 n = 7 j =0.8 n = 10 j =0.6 n = 5 j =0.8 n = 29 j = 1.0 n =14 j = 0.8 n = 139 

MD -- 12.8 

x犀 =12.8 x犀 =11.2 x犀 =13.3 x犀 =11.8 x犀 =11.8 x犀 = 10.8 

[10.9-14.7] [9.4-12.7] [12.3-15.2] [9.4-13.9] [10.1-13.8] [8.2-12.6] 

j =1.3 n = 6 j =0.9 n = 10 j =1.3 n = 4 j =0.9 n = 26 j = 1.1 n =14 j = 1.0 n = 119 

Extended Data Table 4 Lower Dentition Irhoud 3, 11 

H. erectus MPE MPAf Neanderthals EMH RMH 

P4 Lingual Cusps [pres. >1] 50 (2) 85.7 (7) 50 (4) 50 (2) 97 (31) 71.4 (7) 66.7 (173) 

P4 Metaconid position [pres = mesial] 100 (2) 90.9 (11) 100 (5) 66.7 (3) 97 (32) 62.5(8) 80.6 (177) 

P4 Transverse Crest [pres. >0] 0 (2) 36.4 (11) 40 (5) 75 (4) 90 (31) 12.5 (8) 4.5 (177) 

P4 Distal Accessory Ridge [pres. >0] 50 (2) 75 (8) 100 (3) 100 (2) 87 (15) 66.7 (3) 47.1 (145) 

P4 Mesial Accessory Ridge [pres. >0] 0 (2) 0 (7) 25 (4) 100 (2) 13 (25) 66.7 (3) 29.5 (152) 

P4 Asymmetry [pres >0] 100 (2) 46.2 (13) 20 (5) 66.7 (3) 95 (20) 37.5 (8) 0.8 (119) 

P4 Fissure Pattern [pres. = U] 0 (2) 0 (5) 0 (3) 0 (2) 0 (14) 75 (4) 72.9 (145) 

M1 Middle Trigonid Crest [pres. >0] 0 (2) 33.3 (12) 88.9 (11) 50 (2) 92.9 (28) 35.7 (14) 1.4 (207) 

M1 Protostylid [pres.>2] 50 (2) 50 (8) 0 (9) 33.3 (3) 0 (38) 11.8 (17) 0.5 (218) 

M1 Cusp 6 [pres. >0] 100 (2) 28.6 (7) 33.3 (6) 100 (1) 38 (21) 0 (12) 18.1 (200) 

M1 Cusp 7 [pres. >0] 100 (2) 50 (12) 12.5 (8) 0 (2) 18 (33) 45.0 (20) 9.7 (236) 

M2 Y Groove Pattern [pres. = Y] 50 (2) 91.7 (12) 57.1 (7) 0 (1) 79 (33) 76.9 (13) 28.6 (242) 

M2 Cusp number [pres.= 4] 0 (2) 0 (13) 0 (7) 0 (3) 0 (37) 11.8 (17) 63.8 (242) 

Upper Dentition Irhoud 10, 21, 22 

H. erectus MPE MPAf Neanderthals EMH RMH 

I2 Shoveling [pres >1] Present (1) 100 (3) -- 100 (1) 100 (15) 83.3 (6) 23.2 (122) 

I2 Tuberculum dentale [pres. >1] Present (1) 0 (2) -- 100 (1) 88.9 (9) 60 (5) 38.1 (118) 

C Distal Accessory Ridge [pres. >0] Present (1) 66.7 (3) -- 100 (1) 62.5 (8) 100 (2) 39.7 (68) 

M2 Metacone Reduction [pres. <3.5] 0 (2) 0 (8) 0 (4) 0 (1) 5.9 (34) 0 (10) 18.3 (243) 

M2 Hypocone Reduction [pres. <3] 0 (2) 0 (8) 0 (4) 0 (1) 2.9 (34) 0 (8) 24.5 (241) 

M1 Cusp 5 [pres. >0] Present (1) 0 (2) 67.7 (3) 100 (1) 63.6 (22) 50 (10) 41.2 (232) 

M1 Carabelliís Trait [pres. >2] 0 (2) 33.3 (3) 0 (1) 72 (25) 50 (10) 46.2 (272) 

M1 Parastyle [pres. >0] Absent (2) 0 (1) 0 (2) 0 (1) 20.8 (24) 0 (14) 0.8 (299) 

M1 Mesial Accessory Cusps [pres >0] Absent (1) -- 0 (2) -- 45.4 (11) 100 (2) 67.1 (132) 

Extended Data Table 5 Extended Data Figure 1 Extended Data Figure 2 Extended Data Figure 3 Extended Data Figure 4 Extended Data Figure 5
