# The evolution of human skin coloration

# Nina G. Jablonski and George Chaplin 

Department of Anthropology, California Academy of Sciences, Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, CA 94118-4599, U.S.A. E-mails: njablonski@calacademy.org; gchaplin@calacademy.org 

Received 25 March 1999 Revision received 10 August 1999 and accepted 18 February 2000 

> Keywords

: ultraviolet radiation, UVB, melanin, integument, folate, photoprotection, neural tube defects, vitamin D, depigmentation, thermoregulation, race concepts. 

# The evolution of human skin coloration 

Skin color is one of the most conspicuous ways in which humans vary and has been widely used to define human races. Here we present new evidence indicating that variations in skin color are adaptive, and are related to the regulation of ultraviolet (UV) radiation penetration in the integument and its direct and indirect e ff ects on fitness. Using remotely sensed data on UV radiation levels, hypotheses concerning the distribution of the skin colors of indigenous peoples relative to UV levels were tested quantitatively in this study for the first time. The major results of this study are: (1) skin reflectance is strongly correlated with absolute latitude and UV radiation levels. The highest correlation between skin reflectance and UV levels was observed at 545 nm, near the absorption maximum for oxyhemoglobin, sug-gesting that the main role of melanin pigmentation in humans is regulation of the e ff ects of UV radiation on the contents of cutaneous blood vessels located in the dermis. (2) Predicted skin reflectances deviated little from observed values. (3) In all populations for which skin reflectance data were available for males and females, females were found to be lighter skinned than males. (4) The clinal gradation of skin coloration observed among indigenous peoples is correlated with UV radiation levels and represents a compromise solution to the conflicting physiological requirements of photoprotection and vitamin D synthesis. The earliest members of the hominid lineage probably had a mostly unpigmented or lightly pigmented integument covered with dark black hair, similar to that of the modern chimpanzee. The evolution of a naked, darkly pigmented integument occurred early in the evolution of the genus Homo . A dark epidermis protected sweat glands from UV-induced injury, thus insuring the integrity of somatic thermoregulation. Of greater significance to individual reproductive success was that highly melanized skin protected against UV-induced photolysis of folate (Branda & Eaton, 1978, Science 201, 625–626; Jablonski, 1992, Proc. Australas. Soc. Hum. Biol. 5, 455–462, 1999, 

Med. Hypotheses 52, 581–582), a metabolite essential for normal development of the embryonic neural tube (Bower & Stanley, 1989, 

The Medical Journal of Australia 150, 613–619; Medical Research Council Vitamin Research Group, 1991, The Lancet 338, 31–37) and spermatogenesis (Cosentino et al ., 1990, Proc. Natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87, 1431–1435; Mathur et al ., 1977, Fertility Sterility 28, 

1356–1360). As hominids migrated outside of the tropics, varying degrees of depigmentation evolved in order to permit UVB-induced synthesis of previtamin D 3 . The lighter color of female skin may be required to permit synthesis of the relatively higher amounts of vitamin D 3necessary during pregnancy and lactation. Skin coloration in humans is adaptive and labile. Skin pigmentation levels have changed more than once in human evolution. Because of this, skin coloration is of no value in determining phylogenetic relationships among modern human groups.       

> 2000 Academic Press
> Journal of Human Evolution (2000) 39, 57–106 doi:10.1006/jhev.2000.0403 Available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on
> 0047–2484/00/070057+50$35.00/0 2000 Academic Press

Introduction 

Melanin accounts for most of the variation in the visual appearance of human skin. Variation in cutaneous melanin pigmen-tation in humans has been attributed to many factors, with most authorities agreeing that the observed variations re fl ect biological adaptations to some aspect of the environ-ment. Many hypotheses have centered on the role of melanin pigmentation in the regulation of the penetration of sunlight and, more speci fi cally, ultraviolet (UV) radiation, into the skin. The more highly melanized skins of indigenous tropical peoples have been said to aff ord greater protection against the deleterious e ff ects of UV radiation, such as sunburn, skin cancer (Fitzpatrick, 1965) and nutrient photolysis (Branda & Eaton, 1978). The more lightly pigmented skins of peoples inhabiting latitudes nearer the Arctic have been explained as adaptations to the lower UV radiation regimes of those regions and the importance of maintaining UV-induced bio-synthesis of vitamin D 3 in the skin (Murray, 1934; Loomis, 1967). Other adaptationist hypotheses have emphasized the role of skin pigmentation in regulating sensitivity to frostbite (Post et al ., 1975 a), in disease prevention (Wassermann, 1965, 1974), thermoregulation (Roberts & Kahlon, 1976; Roberts, 1977), concealment (Cowles, 1959), or combinations of these factors (Roberts & Kahlon, 1976; Roberts, 1977). The concept of integumentary pigmen-tation as an environmental adaptation has not been universally accepted, however. Some authorities have argued that because UV-radiation-induced sunburn or skin cancers rarely a ff ect reproductive success, melanin pigmentation must be considered only slightly adaptive or nonadaptive (Blum, 1961; Diamond, 1991). It has also been argued that because the relationship between skin color and sunlight appears imperfect, skin color should not be viewed only as an adaptation to the environment (Diamond, 1991). Integumentary pigmen-tation has also been regarded as a pleiotropic byproduct of selection acting on fi rst func-tions of pigmentation genes, such as the regulation of metabolic pathways (Deol, 1975), or as a characteristic controlled by sexual selection for the enhancement of attractiveness to the opposite sex (Diamond, 1988, 1991). In this paper we demonstrate that the previously observed relationship between skin pigmentation in indigenous human populations and latitude is traceable to the strong correlation between skin color and UV radiation. We also present evidence sup-porting the theory that variations in melanin pigmentation of human skin are adaptive and that they represent adaptations for the regulation of the e ff ects of UV radiation on deep strata of the integument. Our presen-tation combines analysis and visualization of data on the skin coloration of indigenous peoples coupled with remote sensing data on UV radiation levels at the Earth ’s surface and physiological evidence concerning the eff ects of UV radiation on levels of essential vitamins and metabolites. 

What skin color was primitive for the hominid lineage? 

Before questions about changes in integu-mentary pigmentation in modern human evolution can be addressed, consideration must be given to the probable primitive condition of the integument in the earliest members of the human lineage. It is likely that the integument of the earliest proto-hominids was similar to that of our closest living relative, the chimpanzee, being white or lightly pigmented and covered with dark hair (Post et al ., 1975 b). In the chimpanzee, exposed areas of skin vary considerably in their coloration depending on the species and subspecies under consideration, but in all groups facial pigmentation increases with 58 . .    .  age and exposure to UV radiation (Post 

et al ., 1975 b). Except for the face, eyelids, lips, pinnae, friction surfaces, and anogenital areas, the epidermis of most nonhuman primates is unpigmented due to an absence of active melanocytes (Montagna &Machida, 1966; Montagna et al ., 1966 a,b), suggesting that this is the primitive condi-tion for primates in general. The hairless areas listed above are pigmented to greater or lesser extents in all primate species (Montagna & Machida, 1966; Montagna 

et al ., 1966 a,b), suggesting that the potential for induction of melanogenesis (Erickson & Montagna, 1975) in exposed skin is also primitive for the group. Physiological models have demonstrated that the evolution of hairlessness and an essentially modern sweating mechanism were coordinated with the higher activity levels associated with the modern limb proportions and striding bipedalism (Montagna, 1981; Schwartz & Rosenblum, 1981; Wheeler, 1984, 1996; Chaplin et al ., 1994). Throughout this transitional period, the critical function of the integument in thermoregulation was maintained through evolution of an increased number of sweat glands, particularly on the face (Cabanac & Caputa, 1979; Falk, 1990), that increased the maximum rate of evaporative cooling available at any one time (Wheeler, 1996; see also Mahoney, 1980). The brain is extremely heat sensitive, and its temperature closely follows arterial temperature (Nelson & Nunneley, 1998). Evolution of a whole-body cooling mechanism capable of fi nely regulating arterial temperature was, there-fore, a prerequisite for brain expansion and increased activity levels. Naked skin itself a ff ords a thermoregulatory advantage because it makes for a reduced total ther-mal load requiring evaporative dissipation (Wheeler, 1996). As the density of body hair decreased and the density of sweat glands increased, the need for protection of sub-epidermal tissues against the destructive eff ects of UV radiation, particularly UVB, also increased. This protection was accom-plished by an increase in melanization of the skin. 

UV radiation at the surface of the Earth 

The sun emits electromagnetic radiation from short-wavelength X-rays to long-wavelength radio waves. Because X-rays and the shortest UV waves (UVC, <280 nm) do not penetrate the atmosphere, middle (UVB, 280 –320 nm) and long (UVA 320 –

400 nm) wavelength UV radiation, along with the visible wavelengths and infrared, are of greatest biological signi fi cance. In order for solar radiation to produce a photochemical e ff ect, it must be absorbed. For an e ff ective photon of radiation to be absorbed, it must fi rst travel from the sun to the body ’s surface through the atmosphere. Atmospheric absorption and scattering of light are functions of the air mass through which light must travel (Daniels, 1959). The air mass, in turn, is a function of the angle of the sun to the observer, which is determined by the time of day, season, latitude and altitude. The air mass has a great in fl uence on the transmission of UV radiation because, in general, scattering is greatest in the UV and shorter visible wavelengths (Daniels, 1959). The transmission of UV and visible radiation to the Earth ’s surface are also determined by absorption in the ozone layer, clouds, dust, haze and various organic compounds (Daniels, 1959, 1964). Prior to the utilization of remote sensing technology, the intensity of UV radiation at the Earth ’s surface and the erythemal response of human skin to UV radiation were estimated using mathematical models (Paltridge & Barton, 1978). Although these models were parameterized to account for the e ff ects of solar elevation, the amounts of ozone and aerosols in the atmosphere, and the surface albedo on estimated UV 59       radiation, they were merely models, not direct measurements. With the application of remote sensing to this problem, however, it has been possible to directly measure the UV radiation reaching the Earth ’s surface, taking ozone concentration and scene re fl ec-tivities (cloud conditions, and snow and ice cover) into account (Herman & Celarier, 1996). The existence of directly measured data means that it is possible to know exactly how much UV radiation made it to the Earth ’s surface at a speci fi c day and time; it is no longer necessary to rely on calculated estimates. The present study is the fi rst in which direct measurements of UV radiation at the Earth ’s surface have been used to test hypotheses concerning the evolution of human skin pigmentation. Relethford (1997) recently suggested that hemispheric di ff erences in human skin color were due to hemispheric di ff erences in UV radiation. In response to this claim, we have demonstrated, using direct measurements of UV radiation, that the annual erythemal means for UV radiation in the northern and southern hemispheres were not signi fi cantly di ff erent, but that signi fi cant di ff erences between the hemispheres are found at the summer and winter solstices (Chaplin &Jablonski, 1998). The magnitude of these di ff erences can be predicted from today ’sperihelion eff ect (i.e., that the Earth is closest to the sun on 3 January, during the Austral Summer). We have also shown (Chaplin & Jablonski, 1998) that the hemispheric di ff erences in skin color that Relethford demonstrated are due in large part to the fact that, in the southern hemi-sphere, the areas receiving high annual UV radiation constitute a much larger percent-age of the total habitable land area than in the northern hemisphere. In other words, a larger proportion of the habitable land of the southern hemisphere lies closer to the equator than it does in the northern hemi-sphere. This area receives high annual doses of UV radiation. In contrast, the vast majority of habitable land in the northern hemisphere lies north of the Tropic of Cancer and receives low annual doses of UV radiation. The hemispheric bias in the latitudinal distribution of land masses has had profound consequences for the evol-ution of skin pigmentation for the humans inhabiting the two hemispheres (Chaplin & Jablonski, 1998). 

Melanin and the e ff ects of UV radiation on human skin 

In the skin, melanin acts as an optical and chemical photoprotective fi lter, which reduces the penetration of all wavelengths of light into subepidermal tissues (Daniels, 1959; Kaidbey et al ., 1979). Electro-magnetic radiation impinging on the human skin can undergo a number of interactions: it can be re fl ected by the surface of the stratum corneum; it can enter the stratum corneum after a slight change in its direction of travel; it can interact with melanin dust in the stratum corneum, resulting in partial or total absorption; it can traverse deeper layers and experience a possible additional scatter-ing; or it can enter the viable epidermis where it encounters melanin packaged within melanosomes (Kollias et al ., 1991). Epidermal melanin has di ff erent forms at di ff erent sites within the skin and these interact di ff erently with radiation (Kollias 

et al ., 1991). At all of these sites, melanin works an optical fi lter to attenuate radiation by scattering (Kollias et al ., 1991). It also acts as a chemical fi lter through its function as a stable free radical that can absorb compounds produced by photochemical action which would be toxic or carcinogenic (Daniels, 1959; Kollias et al ., 1991). The melanin dust of the stratum corneum appears to be a degradation product of the melanosomes, the organelles in which the melanin pigment resides. This serves the highly desirable function of attenuating radiation close to the skin ’s surface, thus 60 . .    .  sparing the deeper, viable layers. Most epi-dermal melanin is packaged in intact melanosomes that are located deeper in the skin, however. These organelles are dis-tributed to keratinocytes throughout the Malpighian layer of the epidermis by the dendritic processes of melanocytes. Thus, the superior photoprotection of highly mela-nized skin is accomplished by absorption and scattering, which are in fl uenced by the density and distribution of melanosomes within keratinocytes in the basal and para-basal layers of the epidermis (Kaidbey et al ., 1979) and by the presence of specks of melanin dust in the stratum corneum (Daniels, 1964). The heavily pigmented melanocytes of darker skins also have the ability to resume proliferation after irradiation with UVB radiation, indicating that they can recover more quickly from the growth-inhibitory e ff ects of UVB exposure (Barker et al ., 1995). Most studies of the e ff ects of UV radiation on human skin have utilized as a standard the minimum-erythemal dose (UVMED), which is the quantity of UV radiation required to produce a barely perceptible reddening of lightly-pigmented skin. Apart from its bene fi cial role in vitamin D synthesis, the e ff ects of UVB radiation on the skin are universally harmful. Suppres-sion of sweating and subsequent disruption of thermoregulation due to sunburn-induced damage to sweat glands are the most serious immediate e ff ects of excessive UVB exposure (Daniels, 1964; Pandolf 

et al ., 1992). Other short-term harmful eff ects include discomfort, lowering of the pain threshold, vesiculation and possible secondary infection following severe sun-burn, desquamation and nutrient photolysis (Branda & Eaton, 1978; Daniels, 1964). Degenerative changes in the dermis and epidermis due to UVB exposure are realized over longer time courses, some eventually resulting in skin cancers. The question from an evolutionary point of view is do any of these e ff ects, singly or in combination, have direct e ff ects on reproductive success? Basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas, for instance, while a signi fi cant cause of mor-bidity in lightly pigmented peoples, rarely in fl uence fi tness because they generally aff ect individuals after reproductive age and are rarely fatal (Blum, 1961; Roberts, 1977; Robins, 1991). Malignant melanomas, though rare (representing 4% of skin cancer diagnoses) are more often fatal than other skin cancers, but their e ff ect on reproductive success is still limited because of their late onset, well beyond the age of fi rst reproduc-tion (Johnson et al ., 1998). We argue here that protection against nutrient photolysis, and speci fi cally photo-lysis of folate, was a prime selective agent which brought about the evolution of deeply pigmented skins among people living under regimes of high UVB radiation throughout most of the year because of the direct connection between folate and individual reproductive success. The importance to individual fi tness of protection of sweat glands and maintenance of thermoregu-latory capability is also seen as contributing to increased melanization. 

Folate and human reproductive success 

Folic acid is an essential nutrient, which is required for nucleotide and, therefore, DNA biosynthesis. Folic acid is converted in the body to its conjugated form, folate. The lack of folate has long been known to bring about a macrocystic megaloblastic anemia because folate is required for the maturation of bone marrow and the development of red blood cells. Folate de fi ciency in nonhuman mammals has also been shown to produce multiple fetal anomalies including malfor-mations of the eye, central nervous system, palate, lip, gastrointestinal system, aorta, kidney and skeleton (Omaye, 1993, and references cited therein). All of these 61       problems can ultimately be traced to folate ’sroles in purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis (Omaye, 1993; Fleming & Copp, 1998). It has recently been con fi rmed that there is a connection between defective folate metabolism and neural tube defects (NTDs) in humans (Fleming & Copp, 1998; Bower & Stanley, 1989; Medical Research Council Vitamin Research Group, 1991). Neural tube defects comprise a family of congenital malformations that result from incomplete neurulation and that are expressed as deformities of varying severity. In cranio-rachischisis totalis , the entire neural tube fails to close; embryos fail early in their develop-ment and are spontaneously aborted. Failure of the cranial neuropore to fuse results in anencephalus or craniorachischisis ,in which the brain is represented by an exposed dorsal mass of undi ff erentiated tissue. Anencephalic embryos often survive into late fetal life or term, but invariably die soon after birth. When failure of neural tube closure disrupts the induction of the over-lying vertebral arches, the resulting con-dition of an open neural canal is called spina bifida . Cases of spina bifida vary in their seriousness. The most disabling involve the protrusion of neural tissue and meninges through an open neural canal (meningo-myelocele). The least serious involve failure of a single vertebral arch to fuse with no herniation of underlying neural tissue ( spina bifida occulta ). Since records have been kept in developed countries, anencephalus and spina bifida have been found to be particularly common in light-skinned populations. These defects accounted for as much as 15% of all peri-natal and 10% of all postperinatal mortality in the worst-a ff ected populations prior to the introduction of preventative nutritional supplementation (Elwood & Elwood, 1980). Since the advent of prenatal diagnosis, the prevalence of NTDs in relation to all con-ceptions has been shown to be signi fi cantly higher than birth prevalence (Velie & Shaw, 1996; Forrester et al ., 1998), partly because of the high rate of early miscarriage in the case of the most serious defects (C. Bower, personal communication). Folic acid prevents 70% of NTDs in humans and is thought to act by direct normalization of neurulation through regu-lation of pyrimidine biosynthesis neces-sary for DNA production (Minns, 1996; Fleming & Copp, 1998). In the body, folate is most sensitive to two major environmental agents, ethanol and UV radiation. In the case of ethanol, folate de fi ciency is a well-documented problem of chronic alcoholics (Tamura & Halsted, 1983). The photo-sensitivity of folate is signi fi cant, and the nutrient can be readily degraded by natural sunlight or UV light (Kaunitz &Lindenbaum, 1977). Photolysis of folate in humans has been demonstrated by a signi fi -cant decline in folate levels when serum (in vitro ) or light-skinned subjects ( in vivo )were exposed to simulated natural sunlight (Branda & Eaton, 1978). A causal relation-ship between in vivo folate photolysis in humans and NTDs, fi rst suggested by Jablonski (1992, 1999), has recently been supported by the report of NTDs in three unrelated subjects whose mothers had been exposed to UV light on the sun beds of tanning salons during the fi rst weeks of their pregnancies (Lapunzina, 1996). Folate de fi ciencies brought about by UV photolysis have also been implicated in the etiology of NTDs in some amphibian populations (Jablonski, 1998) because such defects have been seen in amphibian embryos exposed to UV radiation (Higgins & Sheard, 1926; Licht & Grant, 1997). In addition to its important role in ensur-ing embryonic survival through proper neurulation, folate has been shown to be critical to another important process central to reproduction, spermatogenesis. In both mice (Cosentino et al ., 1990) and rats (Mathur et al ., 1977), chemically induced folate de fi ciency resulted in spermatogenic 62 . .    .  arrest and male infertility, fi ndings which prompted investigations of antifolate agents as male contraceptives in humans. Thus, through folate ’s roles in the survival of embryos through normalization of neurulation and maintenance of male fertility, and its involvement in a range of other physiological processes dependent on nucleotide biosynthesis, regulation of folate levels appears to be critical to individual reproductive success. Folate levels in humans are in fl uenced by dietary intake of folic acid and by destructive, exogenous factors such as UV radiation. Therefore, the solution to the evolutionary problem of maintaining adequate folate levels in areas of high UV radiation involved the ingestion of adequate amounts of folic acid in the diet and protection against UV radiation-induced folate photolysis. The latter was accomplished by increasing the concen-tration of the natural sunscreen, melanin, in the skin. The low prevalences of severe folate de fi ciency (Lawrence, 1983; Lamparelli et al ., 1988) and NTDs (Carter, 1970; Elwood & Elwood, 1980; Buccimazza 

et al ., 1994; Wiswell et al ., 1990; Shaw et al ., 1994) observed among native Africans and African Americans, even among individuals of marginal nutritional status, are probably due to a highly melanized integument, which protects against folate photolysis. 

Skin pigmentation and vitamin D synthesis 

Vitamin D 3 is essential for normal growth, calcium absorption and skeletal develop-ment. De fi ciency of the vitamin can cause death, immobilization, or pelvic deformities which prevent normal childbirth (Neer, 1975). Requirements for vitamin D3 are elevated in females during pregnancy and lactation because of the need for enhanced maternal absorption of calcium in order to build the fetal and neonatal skeletal system (Whitehead et al ., 1981; Kohlmeier &Marcus, 1995; Brunvand et al ., 1996). In most humans, casual exposure to sunlight leads to conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin to previtamin D 3 by UV photons and subsequent isomerization of the latter to vitamin D 3 at body temperature (Loomis, 1967; Webb et al ., 1988). Increasing the melanin in human skin increases the length of exposure to UV light that is needed to maximize synthesis of previtamin D3(Holick et al ., 1981). Deeply melanized skins become nonadaptive under conditions where the concentration of melanin is too high to permit su ffi cient amounts of vitamin D3 precursor to be synthesized in the skin under conditions of available UV radiation (Loomis, 1967; Holick et al ., 1981; Clemens 

et al ., 1982). If the duration of UV exposure is not su ffi cient to catalyze previtamin D 3synthesis, individuals are at much higher risk of vitamin D 3 de fi ciency and its manifes-tations (rickets, osteomalacia, and osteo-porosis), as has been demonstrated by recent migrants from Ethiopia to Israel (Fogelman et al ., 1995) or from the Indian subcontinent to urban centers in the U.K. (Henderson et al ., 1987). Following Murray (1934), Loomis (1967) argued that depigmentation of the skin was a necessary adaptation for humans attempting to inhabit regions outside the tropics, especially those north of 40 N, which receive low average amounts of UV radi-ation throughout the year. In addition, he advocated the position that deeply pig-mented skin was also an adaptation for physiological regulation of vitamin D3levels. To Loomis, a highly melanized integument prevented UV-radiation-induced vitamin D3 toxicity caused by over-synthesis of previtamin D3 . Both of Loomis ’s claims about integumentary pig-mentation in humans and vitamin D 3 levels have been challenged. The hypothesis that deeply pigmented skin protects against hypervitamosis Dunder conditions of high UV radiation has 63       been conclusively disproven. Vitamin Dtoxicity is prevented by a ceiling e ff ect on previtamin D3 synthesis combined with 

in vivo photolysis of vitamin D3 itself (Holick et al ., 1981; Holick, 1987). Vitamin D 3 intoxication can occur as the result of individuals overdosing on vitamin supple-ments, but no cases of naturally occurring vitamin D3 intoxication have ever been reported (Robins, 1991). Loomis ’s central hypothesis concerning depigmentation of the integument of humans living at high latitudes as a require-ment for adequate vitamin D synthesis has been most strongly challenged by Robins (1991). Robins ’ main points are that early 

Homo at high latitudes was exposed to the full impact of the natural environment. Even when clad with animal skins and furs, he claims that enough of the body ’s surface would be exposed to permit synthesis of adequate amounts of previtamin D 3 . While he admits that winters in Europe during glacials would have been particularly cold and dim, he indicates that the late spring and summer would have aff orded good opportunities for hominids to expose their skin to UV radiation. According to Robins (1991), the long, dull winters would not have triggered widespread hypovitamosis D and rickets because vitamin D can be stored in fat and muscle (Rosenstreich et al ., 1971; Mawer et al ., 1972). He suggests that vitamin D de fi ciencies are a product of 

‘‘ industrialization, urbanization and over-population ’’ (Robins, 1991:207) and sup-ports his claim by pointing out that the majority of modern human populations that su ff er from such problems are urban dwell-ers, deprived of natural sunlight and the opportunity to synthesize previtamin D3 .According to Robins, dark-skinned human populations living under conditions of low annual UV radiation do not su ff er from vitamin D de fi ciencies that can be attributed to lack of sunlight. The depigmentation con-spicuous in peoples inhabiting the northern hemisphere above 40 N cannot be traced, according to Robins, to the need to synthe-size vitamin D in their skin. Rather, people with deeply pigmented skin can survive well under conditions of low annual UV radi-ation provided that they spend su ffi cient time outdoors in the spring and summer to build up physiological stores of vitamin D for the winter (Robins, 1991). As is dis-cussed below, the fi ndings of the current study and the weight of current clinical evidence do not support Robins ’ counter-arguments against the vitamin D hypothesis of depigmentation. 

Testing the relationship between skin color and levels of UV radiation 

Previous studies of the relationship between environmental variables and the skin color of indigenous populations using skin re-

fl ectance spectrophotometry demonstrated highest associations with latitude (Roberts & Kahlon, 1976; Roberts, 1977; Tasa et al ., 1985). These were interpreted as re fl ecting the crucial role of UV radiation in determin-ing skin color. Until this time, accurate tests of this relationship were not possible because accurate data on UVMED levels at the Earth ’s surface were not available. Because these data are now available (Herman & Celarier, 1996), we were able to apply them to two critical analyses: (1) in the determination of the geographic distri-bution of the potential for previtamin D 3synthesis; and (2) in assessment of the re-lationship between surface UV radiation levels and skin color re fl ectances for indig-enous populations. 

Methods 

Skin re fl ectance data 

A database of skin re fl ectance data was compiled from the literature. The database comprises samples designated as male, female, and both sexes, for re fl ectance at 64 . .    .  425 nm (blue fi lter), 545 nm (green fi lter) and 685 nm (red fi lter), for the upper inner arm site. In many primary reports, inter-mediate wavelength re fl ectance readings were also provided, but these were not used. The complete skin re fl ectance data set with bibliographic sources is presented in the Appendix. The vast majority of these data had been collected with the E.E.L. (Evans Electric Limited) re fl ectometer. Readings for Colombian natives were the only ones taken using the Photovolt abridged spectro-photometer. These measurements were con-verted to E.E.L.-comparable values by using the regression equation for Belize Creoles developed by Lees & Byard (1978) desig-nated in the Appendix. As is obvious from an inspection of the collated data, the skin re fl ectance data set is far from complete and is strongly skewed toward representation of indigenous human populations from the Old World. The inherent de fi ciencies of this database limited the scope of analyses that could be undertaken. Indigenous populations were de fi ned for purposes of this study as those which had existed in their current locations for a long time prior to European colonization. The names by which areas or groups were identi fi ed were taken from the original citations. Populations known to have high levels of admixture or to have recently migrated to their current locations were excluded. Some populations were repre-sented by males only, others by males and females, and others where the values for the two sexes had been averaged by the original workers. In some cases, the sex of the sub-jects was not stated in the original report. Because more skin re fl ectance data exist for males than for females, analyses of skin re fl ectance in which data for the sexes were combined are slightly biased toward male re fl ectance values. In cases where more than one skin re fl ectance was measured for aspeci fi c population, either for each sex or by multiple workers, the means for each sex were averaged, except in the cases noted below where the re fl ectance values for the sexes were analyzed separately. Re fl ectance data were speci fi ed in orig-inal reports at varying levels of geographic accuracy. Those speci fi ed to a small geo-graphic area such as township or county could be matched to a small number of average UVMED cell values. For those speci fi ed at the regional or country level, a single skin re fl ectance value was associated with multiple UVMED cell values, depend-ing on the size of the region. These varied from one cell (e.g., Germany, Mainz; India, Goa) to 453 cells (Zaire). To over-come the problem of cell replication and arti fi cial exaggeration of variance, the UVMED data for each speci fi ed area was averaged for that area to produce a single value. This data reduction exercise made it possible for a single skin re fl ectance value to be evaluated relative to a single average UVMED value. Because Relethford (1997) has suggested that a di ff erent relationship between UV radiation and skin re fl ectance exists between the northern and southern hemispheres, separate analyses were performed for both hemispheres together and for each hemi-sphere separately. (The only analysis in which this was not done was that comparing the signi fi cance of di ff erences in skin re fl ect-ance between the sexes. See below.) Although the annual UVMED is equal for both hemispheres, the seasonal distribution of UV radiation is di ff erent (Chaplin &Jablonski, 1998). The hemispheres also dif-fer in their respective land surface area (Chaplin & Jablonski, 1998) and degree of land mass connectivity. It is impossible, for instance, for non-seafarers to move around the globe in the southern hemisphere. Lastly, the proportion of di ff erent vegetation zones between the hemispheres is di ff erent, with the northern hemisphere exhibiting more extensive areas of forest, desert and mountains. 65       Calculation of annual average UVMED 

The annual average values for UVMED were derived from readings taken from the NASA Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) which was fl own aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite between 1978 and 1993 (Herman & Celarier, 1996). The data rep-resent the relative daily areal exposure of UV radiation e ff ective in causing skin irritation, computed at each 1 ·25 degree longitude by one degree latitude pixel, between 65 S and 65 N; the solar fl ux was measured at noon (Herman & Celarier, 1996). These readings were computed to account for the total ozone column and scene re fl ectivities (cloud and snow cover) in the same latitude –

longitude pixel. These measurements were then combined with the results of radiative transfer calculations, terrain height, solar zenith angle and the model action spectrum of erythemal sensitivity for caucasoid skin (Herman & Celarier, 1996). The wave-length range of 280 –400 nm sampled by the TOMS ensured that all signi fi cant con-tributions to the erythemal exposure were included in the UVMED. Because the action spectrum is de fi ned up to an arbitrary multiplicative constant, the basic UVMED data are of arbitrary dimensions. The original dataset was very large (over 190,000 data points representing 37,400 readings taken each day from 1979 –1992). Therefore, an abridged dataset (the annual average UVMED) was produced by taking an average for all years of the average of the 21st to the 23rd days of each month. All data analyses in this study were under-taken using S-Plus  2000 and ArcView ,reprojected in Mercator projection. 

Analysis and visualization of the potential for vitamin D 3 synthesis 

The rate of previtamin D3 synthesis in lightly pigmented human skin exposed to natural sunlight has been experimentally determined (Webb et al ., 1988). Working in Boston, Massachusetts in 1986, Webb et al .(1988) found that the earliest occurrence in the year of previtamin D 3 synthesis in neo-natal caucasoid foreskin samples was on 17 March. Because the actual UVMED for that place and time was available from the NASA TOMS dataset, values representing the potential for vitamin D 3 synthesis relative to annual average UVMED could be calcu-lated for all locations included in the NASA TOMS dataset. It was then possible to de fi ne distinct geographic zones represent-ing the di ff ering potentials for vitamin D 3synthesis for light-skinned individuals. The annual average UVMED and average skin re fl ectance measurement for each zone were then calculated and compared. The skin re fl ectance data used for this analysis com-prised data for indigenous people (males, females, both sexes and unspeci fi ed sex), averaged by country and then by zone. We also sought to demonstrate the poten-tial for vitamin D 3 synthesis in the skin of dark-skinned human populations. The length of time required for endogenous vitamin D3 biosynthesis increases with increasing melanin concentration in the skin (Clemens et al ., 1982; Holick et al ., 1981). Thus, the data showing the time of exposure to UV radiation necessary to maximize pre-vitamin D 3 formation in di ff erent human groups were used to calculate the geographi-cal zones in which annual UVMED was not su ffi cient, averaged over the year, to catalyze previtamin D 3 synthesis in moderately and highly melanized skin. 

Sexual di ff erences in skin re fl ectance 

In order to test the hypothesis that females and males of the same populations di ff er in their average skin re fl ectance, we selected data from speci fi c population where skin re fl ectance measurements had been taken and reported separately for males and females. A standard two-sample t-test was used to determine the signi fi cance of the di ff erences between the sexes at the same locality. Separate analyses for the northern 66 . .    .  and southern hemispheres were not under-taken because the small sizes of the data-sets that met the above criteria would have rendered hemisphere-speci fi c analyses meaningless. Further, our objective here was not to test the hypothesis that there is a di ff erence between the hemispheres in the degree of di ff erentiation between the two sexes in skin re fl ectance. 

The relationship of annual average UVMED to skin re fl ectance 

A correlation matrix was used to test the strength of the relationships between annual average UVMED, latitude and skin re-

fl ectance. This analysis was undertaken speci fi cally to determine the strength of the correlation of skin re fl ectance to UVMED relative to its correlation with latitude. The skin re fl ectance data used in this analysis comprised those from indigenous popu-lations, all-sex samples combined, averaged by country. For this analysis, latitude was transformed to absolute latitude, i.e., the absolute value of the latitude, which expresses the angle of a location from the Equator rather than relative north and south. It is unclear from previous studies of human skin pigmentation as to whether workers utilized conventional latitude or absolute latitude for purposes of correlation or regression analyses. Transformation of latitude to absolute latitude is necessary because of the nonlinear relationship between solar insolation and latitude. The transformation to absolute latitude renders this relationship more linear, and thus yields much higher correlations. The relationship between UVMED and skin color re fl ectance was explored in greater detail using a least squares regres-sion. For this analysis, the skin re fl ectance data used were the same as those employed in the correlation matrix analysis described above. Separate regressions were developed for data from each hemisphere, for each widely used skin re fl ectance fi lter (425, 545 and 685 nm). 

Predicted vs. observed skin re fl ectances 

In order to compare predicted vs. observed values for the skin re fl ectances of indigenous peoples, the largest available dataset for observed skin re fl ectance (at 685 nm) was used. It is important to note again that some populations were represented by males only, as both sexes combined, or as unspeci fi ed sex, as discussed. Although these variations in sexual classi fi cation of the raw data added to the expected variance of the pooled data-set, this problem could not be avoided. Signi fi cant outliers from the regression line were then identi fi ed. In order to construct a map of predicted skin colors for modern terrestrial environ-ments, a regression was computed between annual average UVMED and the observed skin re fl ectance. The observed re fl ectances for indigenous populations were based on all available data for a particular area or group. A regression equation derived from a larger data set including values for males, females, both sexes and samples of unknown sex was used: Predicted skin color =annual average UVMED (  0·1088)+72 ·7483. 

Results 

Analysis and visualization of the potential for vitamin D 3 synthesis 

Three zones representing di ff erent poten-tials for UV-induced vitamin D 3 synthesis in light-skinned humans were identi fi ed (Figure 1). The annual average UVMED and average skin re fl ectance measurement for each zone are presented in Table 1. Zone 1 was delimited as the area in which the average daily UVMED was su ffi cient to catalyze previtamin D 3 synthesis throughout the year. This zone comprises the area from 67       Figure 1. The potential for synthesis of previtamin D 3 in lightly pigmented human skin computed from annual average UVMED. The highest annual values for UVMED are shown in light violet, with incrementally lower values in dark violet, then in light to dark shades of blue, orange, green and gray (64 classes). White denotes areas for which no UVMED data exist. Mercator projection. In the tropics, the zone of adequate UV radiation throughout the year (Zone 1) is delimited by bold black lines. Light stippling indicates Zone 2, in which there is not su ffi cient UV radiation during at least one month of the year to produce previtamin D 3 in human skin. Zone 3, in which there is not su ffi cient UV radiation for previtamin D 3 synthesis on average for the whole year, is indicated by heavy stippling. 68 . .    .  approximately 5 north of the Tropic of Cancer to approximately 5  south of the Tropic of Capricorn. Here, previtamin D 3could be synthesized in lightly pigmented skin as a result of casual exposure to UVB throughout all months of the year. Zone 2 was de fi ned as the area in which the aver-age daily UVMED for at least one month was not su ffi cient to produce previtamin D3 in lightly pigmented skin. (This zone is indicated by light stippling in Figure 1.) Large areas of the northern hemisphere fall within this zone. Zone 3 was de fi ned as the area in which the daily UVMED, averaged over the whole year, was not su ffi cient to catalyze previtamin D 3 synthesis in lightly pigmented skin. That is, it was the zone in which previtamin D3 synthesis resulting from UVB exposure, as averaged over the course of a year, was not su ffi cient to meet minimum physiological requirements. (This zone is indicated by heavy stippling in Figure 1.) Although there were some months around the summer solstice during which there was su ffi cient UV radiation to bring about cutaneous previtamin D3synthesis in Zone 3 (and the attendant potential for vitamin D storage), the aver-age daily dose, when averaged over the course of a year, was not su ffi cient to catalyze the reaction. In other words, in-suf fi cient ambient UV radiation is available on a year by year (or long-term) basis to permit adequate cutaneous biosynthesis of previtamin D 3 .It is important to note that the zones de fi ned in Figure 1 were calculated on the basis of the potential for previtamin D3synthesis in light skin. No comparable data were available for dark skin. Data concern-ing the times of exposure necessary to maxi-mize previtamin D3 synthesis in skin samples with di ff erent melanin concen-trations are known, however. These were used to calculate the geographical zones in which annual UVMED was not su ffi cient, averaged over the year, to catalyze pre-vitamin D3 synthesis in moderately and highly melanized skin (Table 2; Figure 2). Figure 2 is a comparison of the estimated positions of Zone 3 from Figure 1 for human populations with lightly, moderately and deeply melanized skin. The fact that for-mation of previtamin D 3 takes more than 

fi ve times as long in highly melanized (Type VI) skin as it does in lightly melanized (Type III) skin means that the continental areas that are ‘‘ vitamin D safe ’’ for darker skins are considerably smaller than they are for lighter skins (Figure 2). 

Sexual di ff erences in skin re fl ectance 

Females were found to be signi fi cantly lighter (i.e., displaying higher re fl ectance values) than males regardless of the fi lter used to measure the re fl ectance (Table 3). 

The relationship of annual average UVMED to skin re fl ectance 

When the relationship between annual aver-age UVMED and values of skin re fl ectance for the combined all-sexes dataset was examined using a correlation matrix it was found that, for skin re fl ectance at all wave-lengths, the correlation with annual average UVMED and absolute latitude were both high (Table 4). The correlation between skin re fl ectance and annual average UVMED was stronger than the correlation between skin re fl ectance and absolute            

> Table 1 Annual average UVMED and average observed skin reflectance measurements at 685 nm (red filter) for each of the zones depicted in Figure 1 and described in the text
> Zone Annual average UVMED Average observed skin re fl ectance at 685 nm 1313 ·237 ·22158 ·355 ·0368 ·168 ·9UVMED is measured in units of arbitrary dimension (Herman & Celarier, 1996).

69       latitude in three instances: for the 545 nm (green) fi lter re fl ectance for the separate hemispheres and for the 685 nm (red) fi lter re fl ectance for the southern hemisphere. The correlation between skin re fl ectance and annual average UVMED was only slightly weaker than the correlation between skin re fl ectance and absolute latitude in a further four instances: for the 425 nm (blue) 

fi lter re fl ectance for the southern hemi-sphere and both hemispheres combined, for the 545 nm (green) fi lter re fl ectance for both hemispheres combined, and for the 685 nm (red) fi lter re fl ectance for both hemispheres combined. In only two cases [425 nm (blue) for the northern hemisphere and 685 nm (red) for the northern hemisphere] was the correlation between skin re fl ectance and absolute latitude much higher than that between skin re fl ectance and annual average UVMED. The correlation between annual average UVMED and absolute latitude based on data from both hemispheres com-bined was found to be 0·935, much higher than the correlation with untrans-formed latitude, 0·741. When the relationship between annual average UVMED and values of skin re fl ect-ance was examined using a least squares regression model (Table 5), the highest r2values were associated with green (545 nm) 

fi lter re fl ectance. 

Predicted vs. observed skin re fl ectances 

The di ff erences between observed and pre-dicted skin re fl ectance values at 685 nm for indigenous populations were generally small (Table 6; Figures 3 and 4), and the di ff er-ence between the average observed and pre-dicted values was not signi fi cant ( P=0 ·9983; two-sample t-test), and did not detract from the validity of the predictive model. 

Discussion 

The results presented here strongly support the theory that the degree of melanin pig-mentation in human skin is an adaptation for the regulation of penetration of UV radiation into the epidermis. 

The geographic distribution of the potential for vitamin D 3 synthesis 

Skin pigmentation is determined as much by the requirements of previtamin D 3 synthesis as by photoprotection. Within Zone 1 as de fi ned in this study, a clinal distribution of skin re fl ectance relative to annual average UVMED can be detected from inspection of the values presented in Table 5. A cline                

> Table 2 The e ff ect of melanin concentration on the estimated annual average UVMED values that, averaged for the year, are not su ffi cient to catalyze previtamin D 3synthesis in human skin
> Skin type (human population) Time of exposure to maximize pre D 3formation (h) (range and mean) Multiplier for amount of time relative to skin Type IIIa, calculated from mean time of exposure Estimated annual average UVMED necessary to catalyze pre D 3formation Type IIIa (European) 0·50 –0·75 (0 ·625) 168 ·1Type V (Asian) 0·75 –1·50 (1 ·125) 1·8122 ·6Type VI (African American) 3·00 –3·50 (3 ·25) 5·2354 The annual average UVMED value for Zone 3 in Table 1 (for lightly pigmented skin) was multiplied by a factor representing the increased number of hours necessary to catalyze previtamin D 3synthesis in more heavily pigmented skin types, based on the results of Holick and colleagues (Holick et al. , 1981). This yielded an estimate of the minimum annual average UVMED necessary to catalyze previtamin D 3synthesis in darker skin types. The designations of skin type and human population are from the original source.

70 . .    .  Figure 2. A comparison of the estimated areas in which annual UVMED is not su ffi cient, averaged over the year, to catalyze previtamin D 3 synthesis in lightly, moderately and highly melanized skin. All zones were de fi ned by the values for previtamin D 3 synthesis potential presented in Table 2. Widely spaced oblique hachure covers the northernmost region of the Northern Hemisphere in which there is not su ffi cient UV radiation, averaged over the entire year, to catalyze the formation of previtamin D 3 in lightly pigmented (Type IIIa) human skin (Zone 3 from Figure 1). Narrowly spaced oblique hachure denotes the area,  in addition to that shown by widely spaced oblique hachure , in which there is not su ffi cient UV radiation to catalyze the formation of previtamin D 3 in moderately melanized (Type V) skin. The large circum-Equatorial area denoted by stippling covers the area,  in addition to the previous two , in which there is not su ffi cient UV radiation averaged over the entire year to catalyze the formation of previtamin D 3 in highly melanized (Type VI) skin. 71       of depigmentation is more noticeable in Zone 2, where increasing depigmentation has helped to ensure maintenance of adequate vitamin D 3 production in the skin throughout most months of the year. Although individuals in this zone do not receive enough UVB during at least one month each year to catalyze previtamin D 3synthesis, intake of vitamin D 3 -containing foods and the ability of the body to store vitamin D3 mitigates this short lapse in previtamin D3 biosynthesis. For humans living in this zone, however, the adoption of more housebound lifestyles with low UV radiation exposure combined with inadequate vitamin D 3 intake in recent years has resulted in a high prevalence of hypo-vitaminosis D (Thomas et al ., 1998). This problem is exacerbated if the human inhab-itants of Zone 2 are relatively dark-skinned. The high prevalence of hypovitaminosis D, rickets, osteomalacia and osteoporosis among populations recently migrated from the Indian subcontinent to the U.K. is higher than that for the light-skinned general population, and shows a marked north –

south gradient consistent with UV-radiation dosage dependence (Hodgkin et al ., 1973; Henderson et al ., 1987). Humans inhabiting Zone 3 are at highest risk of severe vitamin D 3 de fi ciency. Suc-cessful, long-term human habitation of this zone has depended upon two key factors: the evolution of a depigmented integument capable of permitting maximum cutaneous previtamin D 3 synthesis under conditions of available UV radiation and the consumption of foodstu ff s naturally high in vitamin D 3(such as fi sh and marine mammals). Recent migrants to high latitude regions, such as Greenlanders, appear to be only very slowly 

Table 3 Di ff erence between the means of female and male skin re fl ectances for a combined data set of indigenous human populations, based on samples from individual populations for which separate data for males and females were avail-able 

Filter nm Female mean re fl ectance Male mean re fl ectance Two-sample 

t-test 

P-value 425 (blue) 19 ·20 16 ·88 0545 (green) 23 ·93 22 ·78 0·0089 685 (red) 47 ·20 45 ·09 0For re fl ectances at all wavelengths, females were found to be lighter (exhibiting higher re fl ectance values) than males. 

Table 4 Results of the correlation matrix per-formed to examine the relationships between skin re fl ectance (at three wavelengths), absolute latitude and annual average UVMED 

Filter nm by hemisphere (NH, SH or both) Absolute latitude Annual average UVMED 425 (blue), NH 0·974 0·714 425 (blue), SH 0·694 0·668 425 (blue), both 0·966 0·954 545 (green), NH 0·908 0·917 545 (green), SH 0·620 0·967 545 (green), both 0·964 0·957 685 (red), NH 0·844 0·632 685 (red), SH 0·423 0·498 685 (red), both 0·827 0·809 

Table 5 The results of a least squares regression model in which the relationship between skin re fl ectance values for indigenous human populations and average annual UVMED was examined, by hemisphere 

Filter nm, by hemisphere (NH, SH or both) Intercept Slope r2425 (blue), NH 34 ·032 0·059 0·4572 425 (blue), SH 25 ·517 0·045 0·3402 545 (green), NH 45 ·046 0·083 0·7747 545 (green), SH 44 ·193 0·092 0·7013 685 (red), NH 65 ·575 0·073 0·3995 685 (red), SH 66 ·908 0·103 0·2485 685 (red), both 72 ·797 0·109 0·6551 For the 685 nm (red) fi lter re fl ectance, a value is also presented for combined hemispheric skin re fl ectance and UVMED data; this value was used to generate the predicted skin color values in Table 6 and Figure 3, and to compare with those published in previous studies (see Discussion). 72 . .    .  undergoing depigmentation because of their vitamin D 3 -rich diet. Robins (1991) has challenged the theory that depigmentation in high latitude human populations is due to the requirements of endogenous vitamin D 3 synthesis. He has concluded that, for early Homo sapiens on the Eurasian or North American landscapes of the Pleistocene, ‘‘ there is not a scintilla of paleontological or experimental evidence that rickets (or osteomalacia) ever did or would have manifested, regardless of skin colour [sic] ’’ (Robins, 1991:208). The paleoenvironmental and clinical evidence now at hand militates against this interpretation. Populations of Homo sapiens (sensu stricto )have been established above the 40th paral-lel, in areas of low annual UV radiation, for, approximately, only the last 50,000 years. (It is important to note in this connection that there is no equivalent land mass in the southern hemisphere available for human habitation.) The period from approximately 50,000 to 10,000 years ago comprises the Last Glaciation, and includes the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) at 18,000 B.P. During this period, human habitation north of the Tropic of Cancer and, particularly, north of 40 N was limited by low tempera-tures and the proximity of ice sheets. Climatic oscillations were frequent and sudden, and had profound impacts on the distributions of humans and the mammals they depended upon (Williams et al ., 1993). The minimum distance of habitation sites from the southern margin of the ice sheets was approximately 400 –600 km (Madeyska, 1992). During the LGM, the areas of Europe habitable by humans were charac-terized by extreme cold, with annual mean air temperatures 8 C colder than present day, widespread decreases in precipitation, and fi erce dust storms (Frenzel, 1992 a,b). Accurate reconstruction of patterns of human activity north of the 40th parallel from the period of 50,000 to 10,000 B.P. is not possible. It can be safely said, however, that human populations —especially around the LGM —here would have worn more protective clothing and would have needed to seek shelter from the elements more than they do today. The latter would have been particularly true of females and young children. Abundant clinical evidence attests to the fact that moderately to deeply pigmented humans su ff er from various manifestations of hypovitaminosis D3 (including rickets, osteomalacia and osteoporosis) when their opportunities for endogenous vitamin D3synthesis are restricted as a result of changes in lifestyle or geographical relocation. Manifestations of vitamin D 3 de fi ciency in such populations can be attributed to life-style changes such as more indoor living in urban environments and the wearing of con-cealing garments outdoors (Bachrach et al ., 1979; Haworth & Dilling, 1986; Henderson 

et al ., 1987; Gullu et al ., 1998; Wauters & Soesbergen, 1999). The phenomenon is equally true of populations who have recently relocated from an area of high annual UV radiation to one of lower UV, and who have otherwise maintained all aspects of their original lifestyle (Hodgkin 

et al ., 1973; Fogelman et al ., 1995). Pregnant or lactating women and small children undergoing rapid bone growth are most susceptible to changes of UV radiation regime (Bachrach et al ., 1979; Fogelman 

et al ., 1995; Gessner et al ., 1997; Namgung 

et al ., 1998; Waiters et al ., 1999). Vitamin D 3 de fi ciencies are also common among the elderly, where they render individuals more susceptible to osteoporosis and its sequelae (Davies et al ., 1986; Thomas et al ., 1998). The key point here is that overwhelming clinical evidence demonstrates that even a relatively minor decrease in endogenous synthesis of vitamin D3 as a result of reduced annual UV radiation exposure can trigger vitamin D 3 de fi ciencies in moder-ately to deeply pigmented people. These 73       Observed vs. predicted values for human skin re fl ectance at 685 nm based on the results of a linear regression model between observed re fl ectance for all available groups of indigenous humans and country averages of annual average UVMED 

Country and population or area and hemisphere designation (NH or SH) Observed re fl ectance at 685 nm Predicted re fl ectance at 685 nm Afghanistan/Iran (NH) 55 ·70 45 ·55 Algeria (Aures) (NH) 58 ·05 47 ·91 Australia (Darwin) (SH) 19 ·30 36 ·24 Belgium (NH) 63 ·14 65 ·66 Botswana (San) (SH) 42 ·40 39 ·45 Brazil (Caingan) (SH) 49 ·40 48 ·53 Brazil (Guarani) (SH) 47 ·20 45 ·29 Burkina Faso (Kurumba) (NH) 28 ·60 34 ·23 Cambodia (NH) 54 ·00 38 ·99 Cameroon (Fali) (NH) 21 ·50 34 ·37 Chad (Sara) (NH) 24 ·60 34 ·77 China (Southern) (NH) 59 ·17 50 ·49 China (Tibet) (NH) 54 ·70 41 ·78 Ethiopia (NH) 31 ·70 32 ·70 Ethiopia (Highland) (NH) 33 ·55 31 ·35 Germany (Mainz) (NH) 66 ·90 65 ·21 Greenland (Southern) (NH) 55 ·70 70 ·31 India (NH) 44 ·60 48 ·85 India (Bengal) (NH) 49 ·73 44 ·33 India (Goa) (NH) 46 ·40 38 ·93 India (Nagpur) (NH) 41 ·30 41 ·53 India (Northern) (NH) 53 ·26 44 ·23 India (Orissa) (NH) 32 ·05 41 ·52 India (Punjab) (NH) 54 ·24 47 ·89 India (Rajasthan) (NH) 52 ·00 42 ·19 India (Southern) (NH) 46 ·70 37 ·60 Iraq/Syria (Kurds) (NH) 61 ·12 51 ·50 Ireland (Ballinlough) (NH) 65 ·20 67 ·11 Ireland (Carnew) (NH) 64 ·50 65 ·84 Ireland (Longford) (NH) 65 ·00 66 ·99 Ireland (Rossmore) (NH) 64 ·75 66 ·73 Israel (NH) 58 ·20 48 ·67 Japan (Central) (NH) 55 ·42 58 ·51 Japan (Hidakka) (NH) 59 ·10 63 ·58 Japan (Northern) (NH) 54 ·90 61 ·34 Japan (Southwest) (NH) 53 ·55 56 ·68 Jordan (NH) 53 ·00 45 ·36 Kenya (NH) 32 ·40 34 ·21 Lebanon (NH) 58 ·20 50 ·74 Liberia (NH) 29 ·40 40 ·52 Libya (Cyrenaica) (NH) 53 ·50 44 ·19 Libya (Fezzan) (NH) 44 ·00 41 ·31 Libya (Tripoli) (NH) 54 ·40 48 ·83 Malawi (SH) 27 ·00 38 ·67 Mali (Dogon) (NH) 34 ·10 34 ·54 Morocco (NH) 54 ·85 49 ·09 Mozambique (Chopi) (SH) 19 ·45 43 ·84 Observed vs. predicted values were not found to be signi fi cantly di ff erent (P=0 ·9983), based on a standard two-sample t-test between the combined means for the observed (46 ·449) and predicted (46 ·445) 685 nm (red) fi lter skin re fl ectance values. 

Table 6 

74 . .    .  de fi ciencies are more marked in repro-ductive females, growing children and the elderly. Because moderately to deeply pig-mented people require from two to six times as much UV radiation as lightly pigmented individuals to catalyze the synthesis of an equivalent amount of previtamin D 3 (Table 2; Figure 2) (Holick et al ., 1981; Clemens 

et al ., 1982), they are highly susceptible to vitamin D 3 de fi ciencies caused by a change of UV radiation regime. We therefore con-clude, contrary to Robins, that moderately to deeply pigmented modern human popu-lations are optimally tuned for endogenous synthesis of vitamin D 3 under the speci fi cUV radiation regimes under which they evolved. This fi ne-tuning is easily disrupted by changes of lifestyle or locale. This 

(Continued )

Country and population or area and hemisphere designation (NH or SH) Observed re fl ectance at 685 nm Predicted re fl ectance at 685 nm Namibia (SH) 25 ·55 38 ·29 Namibia (Okavango) (SH) 22 ·92 38 ·63 Namibia (Rehoboth Baster) (SH) 32 ·90 36 ·49 Nepal (Eastern) (NH) 50 ·42 46 ·31 Netherlands (NH) 67 ·37 65 ·94 Nigeria (Ebo) (NH) 28 ·20 41 ·86 Nigeria (Yoruba) (NH) 27 ·40 39 ·62 Pakistan (NH) 52 ·30 44 ·15 Papua New Guinea (SH) 35 ·30 37 ·26 Papua New Guinea (Goroka) (SH) 33 ·30 34 ·20 Papua New Guinea (Karker) (SH) 32 ·00 37 ·25 Papua New Guinea (Lufa) (SH) 31 ·20 36 ·88 Papua New Guinea (Mt Hagan) (SH) 35 ·35 31 ·56 Papua New Guinea (Port Moresby) (SH) 41 ·00 35 ·45 Peru (Maranon) (SH) 43 ·05 42 ·28 Peru (Nunoa) (SH) 47 ·70 34 ·89 Philippines (Manila) (NH) 54 ·10 41 ·53 Russia (Chechen) (NH) 53 ·45 59 ·04 Saudi Arabia (NH) 52 ·50 38 ·65 South Africa (SH) 42 ·50 45 ·67 South Africa (Cape) (SH) 50 ·96 50 ·71 South Africa (Hottentot) (SH) 46 ·80 43 ·91 South Africa (San Central) (SH) 43 ·75 41 ·14 Spain (Basques) (NH) 65 ·70 62 ·38 Spain (Leon) (NH) 64 ·66 60 ·80 Sudan (NH) 35 ·50 33 ·45 Swaziland (SH) 35 ·60 44 ·62 Tanzania (Nyatura) (SH) 25 ·80 34 ·12 Tanzania (Sandewe) (SH) 28 ·90 32 ·13 Tunisia (NH) 56 ·30 52 ·03 Turkey (NH) 59 ·15 55 ·56 United Kingdom (Cumberland) (NH) 66 ·75 66 ·99 United Kingdom (London) (NH) 62 ·30 65 ·84 United Kingdom (Northern) (NH) 66 ·10 67 ·49 United Kingdom (Wales) (NH) 65 ·00 66 ·15 Vietnam (NH) 55 ·90 43 ·59 Zaire (NH) 33 ·20 37 ·46 Zaire (Konda) (SH) 29 ·40 39 ·43 Average 46 ·18 46 ·52 

Table 6 

75       Figure 3. Predicted shading of skin colors for indigenous humans based on the results of a linear regression model in which skin re fl ectance (at 685 nm) for indigenous peoples in both hemispheres was allowed to respond to annual average UVMED for both hemispheres. The predicted skin re fl ectance values were  fi rst divided into 50 equal intervals and then graphically represented in gray shades ranging from darkest gray (greatest melanization) to lightest gray (least melanization). Darker shades of gray represent a higher degree of skin melanization and do not represent actual predicted skin colors. Mercator projection. 76 . .    .  Figure 4. Gradation of skin colors for known indigenous human populations, represented by shading from darkest to lightest gray (greatest to least melanization, as in Figure 3), based on observed skin re fl ectances at 685 nm reported in Table 6. Mercator projection. 77       situation applies equally to populations of early Homo sapiens that undertook migra-tions from eastern Africa into the circum-Mediterranean region and Europe. Their original levels of pigmentation would have precipitated vitamin D 3 crises in their new environments, especially among females and infants, and these crises would have been more severe the farther north the popu-lations ventured. Clinical evidence indicates that the ability of humans to store vitamin D 3 and its metabolites for long periods of time in fat and skeletal muscle is dependent on their pre-existing stores of the vitamin (Mawer et al ., 1972). Individuals receiving large doses of vitamin D 3 by injection for the 

fi rst time showed rapid elimination of vita-min D 3 metabolites within 7 –10 days; those who had previously received them showed a much more protracted schedule of elimi-nation (Mawer et al ., 1972). Thus, the potential for vitamin D 3 storage is great if the intake or the endogenous synthesis is high; otherwise it is not. Robins ’ arguments against the depigmentation hypothesis are, therefore, not supported. 

Sexual di ff erences in skin re fl ectance 

Comparison of skin re fl ectances between the sexes con fi rmed previous observations that human females are consistently lighter than males (Byard, 1981; Robins, 1991). Although female skin coloration darkens through adolescence and adulthood and only lightens after 45 (Wiskemann & Wisser, 1956; Byard, 1981), females are still signi fi -cantly lighter (that is, show a higher value for skin re fl ectance) than males for popu-lations in which males and females are represented from the same location. This suggests that the lighter skin pigmentation of females is needed to permit relatively greater UV light penetration of the integument for previtamin D 3 synthesis. The extra calcium needs of females during pregnancy and lactation are met by increasing plasma con-centrations of 1.25-dihydroxyvitamin D, which in turn enhances calcium absorp-tion in the intestine (Wilson et al ., 1990; Whitehead et al ., 1981). Skin pigmentation in human females thus represents a complex compromise between the exigencies of photo-protection and previtamin D 3 synthesis. The documentation of lighter skin in females than in males for all populations raises a serious question concerning the validity of the hypothesis that human skin coloration is in large part determined by sexual selection (Diamond, 1988, 1991). Were this so, one would have to postulate that there was a universal preference of males for females slightly lighter than themselves, even in populations purported to prefer dark skin (e.g., Tasmanians; Diamond, 1988, 1991). Avoidance of the sun by females is practiced in some cultures and is probably maintained as a custom in those cultures in part by mate choice. It is unlikely, however, that this acquired custom would have any e ff ect on constitutive pig-mentation through time unless inherently more lightly pigmented females who also avoided the sun were more reproductively successful than more darkly pigmented females who followed the same practice. We suggest that lighter pigmentation in human females began as a trait directly tied to increased fi tness and was subsequently reinforced and enhanced in many human populations by sexual selection. 

Annual average UVMED and skin re fl ectance 

Previous studies of the relationship between skin re fl ectance and environmental variables (Roberts & Kahlon, 1976; Tasa et al ., 1985), undertaken before remote sensing data on UV radiation were available, found highest correlations between 685 nm fi lter skin re fl ectance and latitude ( r=0 ·835 by Roberts & Kahlon, 1976, and r=0 ·82 by Tasa et al. , 1985). Relative to these values, calculations based on the larger skin re fl ect-ance dataset amassed for this study showed a very similar correlation ( r=0 ·827). The 78 . .    .  generally very high correlations between skin re fl ectance at all wavelengths and annual average UVMED speaks of the close re-lationship of UV radiation to skin color (contra Diamond, 1991). The generally small di ff erences found between observed and expected values for skin coloration appear to re fl ect di ff erences between populations in duration of habi-tation in their respective areas. Populations believed to have inhabited their current area of distribution for 10 –20,000 years (e.g., Spanish Basques) conform most closely to predicted values for skin re fl ectance. Those which are thought to have migrated into their current locations more recently (e.g., Aboriginal Australians from Darwin who are migrants from the Central Desert) conform less closely to predicted values. Cultural practices have had signi fi cant eff ects on rates of change of integumentary pigmentation in human populations that have undergone migrations, especially in the last 20,000 or so years. The fi rst modern human inhabitants of Tibet, for instance, were clad, not naked. The skin of modern Tibetans is lighter than would be predicted from the annual average UVMED alone probably because of the relative recency of their migration and because the obligate wearing of clothes has meant that the areas of skin available for previtamin D3 syn-thesis (such as the face) had to remain relatively unpigmented. By the same token, immigrants to the New World who inhabit tropical forests are also relatively lightly pig-mented. This is probably again because of the relative recency of their immigration, but also because of their habitual shade-seeking behavior (Hames, 1992), which mitigates the photolytic e ff ects of UV radiation. 

The speci fi c role of melanin in human skin 

Melanin has general absorption from the infrared to the ultraviolet, but the ab-sorption maxima of other integumentary pigments are more speci fi c. Although it is subject to the e ff ects of melanin, the absorp-tion from oxyhemoglobin can be sampled with a green (545 nm) fi lter. UV absorption at this value is greater in lightly pigmented individuals and produces a greater ery-themal response (Daniels & Imbrie, 1958; Daniels, 1964). The strongest statistical correlations between skin re fl ectance and UVMED are observed for the 545 nm fi lter (Tables 4 and 5), suggesting that the main role of melanin pigmentation in humans is regulation of the e ff ects of UV radiation on the contents of cutaneous blood vessels located in the dermis. This fi nding supports the proposition that skin re fl ectance, par-ticularly in the wavelength approximating the absorption maximum of oxyhemoglobin (545 nm), has been optimized by natural selection to balance the con fl icting require-ments of prevention of folate photolysis (photoprotection) and previtamin D 3 syn-thesis (requiring UV penetration). We would predict that the relationship between annual average UVMED and green fi lter re fl ectance would be even stronger in females than in males because of their need to optimize the endogenous synthesis of previtamin D3 . Unfortunately, because insu ffi cient sex-speci fi c re fl ectance data exist for each hemisphere, this hypothesis could not be conclusively tested. 

Conclusions 

The results presented here demonstrate that skin coloration in humans is highly adaptive and has evolved to accommodate the physiological needs of humans as they have dispersed to regions of widely varying annual UVMED. The dual selective pressures of photoprotection and vitamin D 3 synthesis have created two clines of skin pigmentation. The fi rst cline, from the equator to the poles, is de fi ned by the signi fi cantly greater need for photoprotection at the equator in par-ticular and within the tropics in general. Deeply melanized skin protects against folate photolysis and helps to prevent 79       UV-induced injury to sweat glands (and sub-sequent disruption of thermoregulation). The second cline, from approximately 30 N to the North Pole, is de fi ned by the greater need in high latitudes to accommodate as much pre-vitamin D 3 synthesis as possible in areas of low annual UVMED. Humans inhabiting re-gions at the intersection of these clines dem-onstrate a potential for developing varying degrees of facultative pigmentation (tanning) (Quevedo et al ., 1975). Moderately melan-ized skin would appear to be at risk of vitamin D3 de fi ciency and rickets under conditions where UV radiation is restricted as a result of latitude, cultural practices or both. The results of this study suggest that skin pigmentation is relatively labile, and that adaptations to local UVMED conditions can occur over relatively short periods of geological time. Thus, it is likely that some human lineages through time may have gone through alternating periods of depigmen-tation and pigmentation (or vice versa) as they moved from one UVMED regime to another. As the pace of human migrations has quickened in recent centuries, more and more populations are fi nding themselves liv-ing under UV irradiation regimes to which they are inherently poorly adapted (e.g., the English who settled in Australia in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and the Indians and Pakistanis who have moved to northern England in recent decades), with major public health consequences (Kaidbey 

et al ., 1979; Henderson et al ., 1987). Cul-tural practices such as sun-bathing and pur-dah have in some cases exacerbated these conditions and mitigated others. Because of its high degree of responsiveness to environ-mental conditions, skin pigmentation is of no value in assessing the phylogenetic relationships between human groups. 

Acknowledgements 

We express our deepest thanks to Carol Bower, whose intellectual input and moral support helped to move this research for-ward in its earliest stages. We also wish to express our gratitude to James Rohr, Fiona Stanley and Tom Poiker for useful discussions, to Elizabeth Weatherhead for providing access to the NASA TOMS UVMED data, to Kenneth Beals for provid-ing a digital copy of the unpublished data-base collated at Oregon State University, and to Charles Convis of the Conservation Support Program of Environmental Systems Research Institute for donations of GIS soft-ware. Patty Shea-Diner is thanked for her considerable help in gathering bibliographic resources. Comments from C. Loring Brace and three anonymous reviewers led to signi fi cant improvements in the manuscript. 

References                                                     

> Bachrach, S., Fisher, J. &Parkes, J. S. (1979). An outbreak of vitamin D de fi ciency rickets in a susceptible population. Pediatrics 64, 871 –877. Banerjee, S. (1984). The inheritance of constitutive and facultative skin colour. Clin. Genet. 35,
> 256 –258. Barker, D., Dixon, K., Medrano, E. E., Smalara, D., Im, S., Mitchell, D., Babcock, G. & Abdel-Malek, Z. A. (1995). Comparison of the responses of human melanocytes with di ff erent melanin contents to ultra-violet B irradiation. Cancer Research 55, 4041 –4046. Barnicot, N. A. (1958). Re fl ectometry of the skin in southern Nigerians and in some mulattoes. Hum. Biol. 30, 150 –160. Blum, H. F. (1961). Does the melanin pigment of human skin have adaptive value? Quart. Rev. Biol.
> 36, 50 –63. Bower, C. & Stanley, F. J. (1989). Dietary folate as a risk factor for neural-tube defects: evidence from a case-control study in Western Australia. The Medical Journal of Australia 150, 613 –619. Branda, R. F. &Eaton, J. W. (1978). Skin color and nutrient photolysis: An evolutionary hypothesis.
> Science 201, 625 –626. Brunvand, L., Quigstad, E., Urdal, P. & Haug, E. (1996). Vitamin D de fi ciency and fetal growth. Early Hum. Dev. 45, 27 –33. Buccimazza, S. S., Molteno, C. D., Dunne, T. T. & Viljoen, D. L. (1994). Prevalence of neural tube defects in Cape Town, South Africa. Teratology 50,
> 194 –199. Buchi, E. C. (1957). Eine spektrophotometrische Untersuchung der Hautgarbe von Angehorigen ver-schiedener Kasten in Bengalen. Bull. Scheizr. Ges. Anthropol. Ethnol. 34, 7–8.

80 . .    .  Byard, P. J. (1981). Quantitative genetics of human skin color. Yearb. phys. Anthrop. 24, 123 –137. Byard, P. J. & Lees, F. C. (1982). Skin colorimetry in Belize. II. Inter- and intra-population variation. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 58, 215 –219. Cabanac, M. & Caputa, M. (1979). Natural selec-tive cooling of the human brain: evidence of its occurrence and magnitude. J. Physiol. 286, 255 –264. Carbonnel, J. P. & Olivier, G. (1966). Documents re fl ectrometriques sur la couleur de la peau dans le sud-est asiatique. Bull. Mem. Soc. Anthropol. Paris 9, 

137 –144. Caro, L. (1980). La re fl ectancia de la piel en Espanoles del Noroeste. Bol. Soc. Espanola Anthropol. Biol. 1, 

24 –31. Carter, C. (1970). Ethnic origin and neural tube malformations. Developm. Med. Child Neurol. 12, 

372 –373. Cartwright, R. A. (1975). Skin re fl ectance results from Holy Island, Northumberland. Ann. Hum. Biol. 2, 

347 –354. Chamla, M.-C. & Demoulin, F. (1978). Re fl ectance de la peau, pigmentation des cheveux et des yeux des Chaouias de Buizina (Aures, Algerie). 

L’Anthropologie 82, 61 –94. Chaplin, G. & Jablonski, N. G. (1998). Hemispheric di ff erence in human skin color. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 

107, 221 –224. Chaplin, G., Jablonski, N. G. & Cable, N. T. (1994). Physiology, thermoregulation and bipedalism. 

J. hum. Evol. 27, 497 –510. Clemens, T. L., Henderson, S. L., Adams, J. S. & Holick, M. F. (1982). Increased skin pigment reduces the capacity of skin to synthesize vitamin D3. 

The Lancet 1982, 74 –76. Conway, D. L. & Baker, P. T. (1972). Skin re fl ectance of Quecha Indians: the e ff ect of genetic admixture, sex and age. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 36, 267 –282. Cosentino, M. J., Pakyz, R. E. & Fried, J. (1990). Pyrimethamine: an approach to the development of a male contraceptive. Proc. Natn. Acad. Sci. (U.S.A.) 

87, 1431 –1435. Cowles, R. B. (1959). Some ecological factors bearing on the origin and evolution of pigment in the human skin. Am. Nat. 93, 283 –293. Daniels, F. Jr (1959). The physiological eff ects of sunlight. J. Invest. Dermatol. 32, 147 –155. Daniels, F. Jr (1964). Man and radiant energy: solar radiation. In (D. B. Dill & E. F. Adolph, Eds) 

Adaptation to the Environment. Handbook of Physi-ology , pp. 969 –985. Washington, D.C.: American Physiological Society. Daniels, F. Jr & Imbrie, J. D. (1958). Comparison between visual grading and re fl ectance measure-ments of erythema produced by sunlight. J. Invest. Dermatol. 30, 295 –304. Das, S. R. & Mukherjee, D. P. (1963). A spectro-photometric colour survey among four Indian castes and tribes. Zeit. Morphol. Anthropol. 54, 190 –200. Davies, M., Mawer, E. B., Hann, J. T. & Taylor, J. L. (1986). Seasonal changes in the biochemical indices of vitamin D de fi ciency in the elderly: a comparison of people in residential homes, long-stay wards and attending a day hospital. Ageing 15, 77 –83. Deol, M. S. (1975). Racial di ff erences in pigmen-tation and natural selection. Ann. Hum. Genet. 38, 

501 –503. Diamond, J. (1988). Survival of the sexiest. Discover 9, 

74 –81. Diamond, J. (1991). The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee . London: Radius. Diaz Ungria, A. G. (1965). La pigmentacion de la piel en los indigenas Guahibos. Homenaje a Juan Comas en su 65 Anniversario , vol. 11. Antropologica Fisica .Mexico City: Editorial Libros de Mexico. Ducros, A., Ducros, J. & Robbe, P. (1975). Pig-mentation et brunissement compares d’Eskimo (Ammassalimut, Groenland de l ’Est). L’Anthropologie 

79, 299 –316. Elwood, J. M. & Elwood, J. H. (1980). Epidemiology of Anencephalus and Spina Bi fi da . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Erickson, K. L. & Montagna, W. (1975). The induc-tion of melanogenesis by ultraviolet light in the pigmentary system of rhesus monkeys. J. Invest. Dermatol. 65, 279 –284. Falk, D. (1990). Brain evolution in Homo : The 

‘‘ radiator ’’ theory. Brain, Behav. & Evol. 13, 

333 –381. Fitzpatrick, T. B. (1965). Introductory lecture. In (E. J. Bower, Ed.) Recent Progress in Photobiology ,pp. 365 –373. New York: Academic Press. Fleming, A. & Copp, A. J. (1998). Embryonic folate metabolism and mouse neural tube defects. Science 

280, 2107 –2109. Fogelman, Y., Rakover, Y. & Luboshitsky, R. (1995). High prevalence of vitamin D de fi ciency among Ethiopian women immigrants to Israel: exacerbation during pregnancy and lactation. Isr. J. Med. Sci. 31, 

221 –224. Forrester, M. B., Merz, R. D. & Yoon, P. W. (1998). Impact of prenatal diagnosis and elective termination on the prevalence of selected birth defects in Hawaii. 

Am. J. Epidemiol. 148, 1206 –1211. Frenzel, B. (1992 a). Maximum cooling of the Last Glaciation (about 20,000 to 18,000 yr B.P.). In (B. Frenzel, M. Pecsi & A. A. Velichko, Eds) Atlas of Paleoclimates and Paleoenvironments of the Northern Hemisphere , pp. 97 –99. Budapest: Geographical Research Institute, Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Frenzel, B. (1992 b). The Summer surface albedo at about 18,000 B.P. In (B. Frenzel, M. Pecsi & A. A. Velichko, Eds) Atlas of Paleoclimates and Paleoenviron-ments of the Northern Hemisphere , p. 100. Budapest: Geographical Research Institute, Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Frisancho, A. R., Wainwright, R. & Way, A. (1981). Heritability and components of phenotypic expres-sion in skin re fl ectance of Mestizos from the Peruvian lowlands. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 55, 203 –208. Gessner, B. D., deSchweinitz, E., Petersen, K. M. & Leandowski, C. (1997). Nutritional rickets among breast-fed black and Alaska Native children. Alaska Med. 39, 72 –74. 81       Gullu, S., Erdogan, M. F., Uysal, A. R., Baskal, N., Kamel, A. N. & Erdogan, G. (1998). A potential risk for osteomalacia due to sociocultural lifestyle in Turkish women. Endocr. J. 45, 675 –678. Hames, R. (1992). Time allocation. In (E. A. Smith & B. Winterhalder, Eds) Evolutionary Ecology and Human Behavior , pp. 203 –237. Hawthorne, New York: Aldine de Gruyter. Harrison, G. A. (1973). Di ff erences in human pigmen-tation: measurement, geographic variation, and causes. J. Invest. Dermatol. 60, 418 –426. Harrison, G. A. & Owen, J. J. T. (1964). Studies on the inheritance of human skin colour. Ann. Hum. Genet. 

28, 27 –37. Harrison, G. A. & Salzano, F. M. (1966). The skin colour of the Caingang and Guarini Indians of Brazil. 

Hum. Biol. 38, 104 –111. Harrison, G. A., Kuchemann, C. F., Moore, M. A. S., Boyce, A. J., Baju, T., Mourant, A. E., Godber, M. J., Glasgow, B. G., Kopec, A. C., Tills, D. & Clegg, E. J. (1969). The e ff ects of altitudinal vari-ation in Ethiopian populations. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B. 256, 147 –182. Harvey, R. G. & Lord, J. M. (1978). Skin colour of the Ainu of Hidaka, Hokkaido, northern Japan. Ann. Hum. Biol. 5, 459 –467. Haworth, J. C. & Dilling, L. A. (1986). Vitamin-D-de fi cient rickets in Manitoba, 1972 –84. CMAJ 134, 

237 –241. Henderson, J. B., Dunnigan, M. G., McIntosh, W. B., Abdul-Motaal, A. A., Gettinby, G. & Glekin, B. M. (1987). The importance of limited exposure to ultra-violet radiation and dietary factors in the aetiology of Asian rickets: a risk factor model. Q. J. Med. 63, 

413 –425. Herman, J. & Celarier, E. (1996). TOMS Version 7 UV-Erythemal Exposure: 1978 –1993. (Data devel-oped by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Ozone Processing Team.) Hiernaux, J. (1972). La re fl ectance de la peau dans une communaute de Sara Madjingay (Republique du Tchad). L’Anthropologie 76, 279 –300. Hiernaux, J. (1977). Long-term biological e ff ects of human migration from the equatorial forest: a case study of human adaptation to a hot and wet climate. In (G. A. Harrison, Ed.) Population Structure and Human Variation. International Biological Program ,pp. 187 –217. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Higgins, G. M. & Sheard, C. J. (1926). E ff ects of ultraviolet radiation on the early larval development of Rana pipiens . J. Exp. Zool. 46, 333 –343. Hodgkin, P., Kay, G. H., Hine, P. M., Lumb, G. A. & Stanbury, S. W. (1973). Vitamin-D de fi ciency in Asians at home and in Britain. The Lancet 1973, 

167 –172. Holick, M. F. (1987). Photosynthesis of vitamin D in the skin: eff ect of environmental and life-style variables. Fed. Proc. 46, 1876 –1882. Holick, M. F., MacLaughlin, J. A. & Doppelt, S. H. (1981). Regulation of cutaneous previtamin D3 photosynthesis in man: skin pigment is not an essential regulator. Science 211, 590 –593. Huizinga, J. (1968). Human biological observations on some African populations of the thorn savanna belt: I and II. Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Weten. Ser. C 71, 

356 –390. Hulse, F. S. (1967). Selection for skin color among the Japanese. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 27, 143 –156. Hulse, F. S. (1969). Skin color among the Yemenite Jews of the isolate from Habban. Proc. 8th Cong. Anthropol. Ethnol. Sci. , pp. 226 –228. Tokyo. Hulse, F. S. (1973). Skin colour in Northumberland. In (D. F. Roberts & E. Sunderland, Eds) Genetic Variation in Britain , vol. 12. Symposia of the Society for the Study of Human Biology , pp. 245 –257. London: Taylor & Francis. Jablonski, N. G. (1992). Sun, skin colour and spina bi fi da: an exploration of the relationship between ultraviolet light and neural tube defects. Proc. Australas. Soc. Hum. Biol. 5, 455 –462. Jablonski, N. G. (1998). Ultraviolet light-induced neural tube defects in amphibian larvae and their implications for the evolution of melanized pigmen-tation and declines in amphibian populations. 

J. Herpetol. 32, 455 –457. Jablonski, N. G. (1999). A possible link between neural tube defects and ultraviolet light exposure. Med. Hypotheses 52, 581 –582. Jaswal, I. J. (1979). Skin colour in northern Indian populations. J. hum. Evol. 8, 361 –366. Johnson, T. M., Hamilton, T. & Lowe, L. (1998). Multiple primary melanomas. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 

39, 422 –427. Kahlon, D. P. (1973). Skin colour in the Sikh commu-nity in Britain. In (D. F. Roberts & E. Sunderland, Eds) Genetic Variation in Britain , vol. 12. Symposia of the Society for the Study of Human Biology ,pp. 265 –276. London: Taylor & Francis. Kaidbey, K. H., Poh Agin, P., Sayre, R. M. & Kligman, A. M. (1979). Photoprotection by melanin —a com-parison of black and Caucasian skin. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 1, 249 –260. Kalla, A. K. (1969). A ffi nities in skin pigmentation of some Indian populations. Hum. Hered. 19, 499 –

505. Kalla, A. K. (1972). Parent –child relationship and sex di ff erences in skin tanning potential in man. Human Genetik 15, 39 –43. Kalla, A. K. (1973). Ageing and sex di ff erences in human skin pigmentation. Z. Morph. Anthrop. 65, 

29 –33. Kalla, A. K. & Tiwari, S. C. (1970). Sex di ff erence in skin colour in man. Acta Genet. Med. Gemmelogicae 

19, 472 –476. Kaunitz, J. & Lindenbaum, J. (1977). Bioavailability of folic acid added to wine. Ann. Int. Med. 87, 542 –545. Kohlmeier, L. & Marcus, R. (1995). Calcium disorders of pregnancy. Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. North Am. 24, 

15 –39. Kollias, N., Sayre, R. M., Zeise, L. & Chedekel, M. R. (1991). Photoprotection by melanin. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B: Biol. 9, 135 –160. 82 . .    .  Lamparelli, R. D., Bothwell, T. H., MacPhail, A. P., van der Westhuyzen, J., Baynes, R. D. & MacFarlane, B. J. (1988). Nutritional anaemia in pregnant coloured women in Johannesburg. S. Afr. Med. J. 73, 477 –481. Lapunzina, P. (1996). Ultraviolet light-related neural tube defects? Am. J. Med. Gen. 67, 106. Lasker, G. (1954). Photoelectric measurement of skin color in a Mexican Mestizo population. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 12, 115 –122. Lawrence, V. A. (1983). Demographic analysis of serum folate and folate-binding capacity in hospital-ized patients. Acta Haematol. 69, 289 –293. Lees, F. & Byard, P. (1978). Skin colorimetry in Belize. 1. Conversion formulae. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 48, 

515 –522. Leguebe, A. (1961). Contribution a l ’e´tude de la pig-mentation chez l ’homme. Bull. Inst. Roy. Sci. Nat. Belg. 37, 1–29. Licht, L. E. & Grant, K. P. (1997). The e ff ects of ultraviolet radiation on the biology of amphibians. 

Am. Zool. 37, 137 –145. Loomis, W. F. (1967). Skin-pigment regulation of vitamin-D biosynthesis in man. Science 157, 

501 –506. Lourie, J. A. (1973). III. Physical characteristics of Yemenite and Kurdish Jews in Israel. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., Ser. B 266, 101 –112. Madeyska, T. (1992). Human occupation of the Old World during the last Glaciation. In (B. Frenzel, M. Pecsi & A. A. Velichko, Eds) Atlas of Paleoclimates and Paleoenvironments of the Northern Hemisphere ,pp. 130 –131. Budapest: Geographical Research Institute, Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Mahoney, S. A. (1980). Cost of locomotion and heat balance during rest and running from 0 to 55 C in a patas monkey. J. Appl. Physiol. 49, 789 –800. Mathur, U., Datta, S. L. & Mathur, B. B. (1977). The eff ect of aminopterin-induced folic acid de fi ciency on spermatogenesis. Fertility Sterility 28, 1356 –1360. Mawer, E. G., Backhouse, J., Holman, C. A., Lumb, G. A. & Stanbury, S. W. (1972). The distribution and storage of vitamin D and its metabolites in human tissues. Clin. Sci. 43, 413 –431. Medical Research Council Vitamin Research Group. (1991). Prevention of neural tube defects: results of the Medical Research Council vitamin study. The Lancet 338, 131 –137. Mehrai, H. & Sunderland, E. (1990). Skin colour data from Nowshahr City, northern Iran. Ann. Hum. Biol. 

17, 115 –120. Minns, R. (1996). Folic acid and neural tube defects. 

Spinal Cord 34, 460 –465. Montagna, W. (1981). The consequences of having a naked skin. Birth Defects Original Article Series 17, 1–7. Montagna, W. & Machida, H. (1966). The skin of primates. XXXII. The Philippine tarsier (Tarsius syrichta ). Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 25, 71 –84. Montagna, W., Machida, H. & Perkins, E. (1966 a). The skin of primates. XXVII. The stump-tail macaque ( Macaca speciosa ). Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 24, 

71 –86. Montagna, W., Machida, H. & Perkins, E. M. (1966 b). The skin of primates. XXXII. The skin of the angwantibo (Arctocebus calabarensis ). Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 25, 277 –290. Murray, F. G. (1934). Pigmentation, sunlight and nutritional disease. Am. Anthrop. 36, 438 –445. Namgung, R., Tsang, R. C., Lee, C., Han, D. G., Ho, M. L. & Sierra, R. I. (1998). Low total body bone mineral content and high bone resorption in Korean winter-born versus summer-born newborn infants. 

J. Pediatr. 132, 421 –425. Neer, R. M. (1975). The evolutionary signi fi cance of vitamin D, skin pigment, and ultraviolet light. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 43, 409 –416. Nelson, D. A. & Nunneley, S. A. (1998). Brain tem-perature and limits on transcranial cooling in humans: quantitative modeling results. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 78, 353 –359. Ojikutu, R. O. (1965). Die Rolle von Hautpigment und Schewissdrusen in der Klimaanpassung des Menschen. Homo 16, 77 –95. Omaye, S. T. (1993). Nutrient de fi ciencies and preg-nancy outcome. In (R. P. Sharma, Ed.) Dietary Factors and Birth Defects , pp. 12 –41. San Francisco: Paci fi c Division AAAS. Paltridge, G. W. & Barton, I. J. (1978). Erythemal ultraviolet radiation distribution over Australia —the calculations, detailed results and input data including frequency analysis of observed Australia cloud cover. 

C.S.I.R.O. Division of Atmospheric Physics Technical Paper No. 33, 1–48. Pandolf, K. B., Gange, R. W., Latzka, W. A., Blank, I. H., Kraning, K. K. d. & Gonzalez, R. R. (1992). Human thermoregulatory responses during heat exposure after arti fi cially induced sunburn. Am. J. Physiol. 262, R610 –R616. Post, P. W., Daniels, F. Jr & Binford, R. T. (1975 a). Cold injury and the evolution of ‘‘ white ’’ skin. Hum. Biol. 47, 65 –80. Post, P. W., Szabo, G. & Keeling, M. E. (1975 b). A quantitative and morphological study of the pigmen-tary system of the chimpanzee with light and electron microscope. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 43, 435 –444. Quevedo, W. C. Jr, Fitzpatrick, T. B., Pathak, M. A. & Jimbow, K. (1975). Role of light in human skin color variation. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 43, 393 –408. Rebato, E. (1987). Skin colour in the Basque popu-lation. Anthrop. Anz. 45, 49 –55. Relethford, J. & Lees, F. (1981). Admixture and skin color in the transplanted Tlaxcatecan population of Saltillo, Mexico. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 56, 259 –267. Relethford, J. H. (1997). Hemispheric di ff erences in human skin color. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 104, 

449 –458. Ritgers-Aris, C. A. (1973 a). A re fl ectometric study of the skin in Dutch families. J. hum. Evol. 2, 123 –136. Ritgers-Aris, C. A. (1973 b). Re fl ectometrie cutane ´e des Fali (Cameroun). Proc. Kon. Ned. Akad. Weten. Ser. C 76, 500 –511. Roberts, D. F. (1977). Human pigmentation: its geographical and racial distribution and biological signi fi cance. J. Soc. Cosmetic Chem. 28, 329 –342. 83       Roberts, D. F. & Kahlon, D. P. (1976). Environmental correlations of skin colour. Ann. Hum. Biol. 3, 

11 –22. Roberts, D. F., Kromberg, J. G. & Jenkins, T. (1986). Di ff erentiation of heterozygotes in recessive albinism. 

J. Med. Genet. 23, 323 –327. Robins, A. H. (1991). Biological Perspectives on Human Pigmentation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Rosenstreich, S. J., Rich, C. & Volwiler, W. (1971). Deposition in and release of vitamin D3 from body fat: evidence for a storage site in the rat. J. Clin. Invest. 50, 679 –687. Schwartz, G. G. & Rosenblum, L. A. (1981). Allometry of primate hair density and the evolution of human hairlessness. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 55, 

9–12. Shaw, G. M., Jensvold, N. G., Wasserman, C. R. & Lammer, E. J. (1994). Epidemiologic characteristics of phenotypically distinct neural tube defects among 0·7 million California births, 1983 –1987. Teratology 

49, 143 –149. Smith, J. & Mitchell, R. J. (1973). Skin colour studies in South Wales, the Isle of Man and Cumbria. In (D. F. Roberts & E. Sunderland, Eds) Genetic Vari-ation in Britain , vol. 12. Symposia of the Society for the Study of Human Biology , pp. 259 –264. London: Taylor & Francis. Sunderland, E. (1979). Skin color variability in the Middle East and Asia. Physiological and Morphological Adaptation and Evolution. World Anthropology ,pp. 1 –18. The Hague: Mouton. Sunderland, E. & Coope, E. (1973). XII. Genetic studies in Jordan. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., Ser. B 

266, 207 –220. Sunderland, E. & Woolley, V. (1982). A study of skin pigmentation in the population of the former county of Pembrokeshire, Wales. Hum. Biol. 54, 

387 –401. Sunderland, E., Tills, D., Bouloux, C. & Doyl, J. (1973). Genetic studies in Ireland. In (D. F. Roberts & E. Sunderland, Eds) Genetic Variation in Britain ,vol. 11. Symposia of the Society for the Study of Human Biology , pp. 141 –159. London: Taylor & Francis. Tamura, T. & Halsted, C. H. (1983). Folate turnover in chronically alcoholic monkeys. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 

101, 623 –628. Tasa, G. L., Murray, C. J. & Boughton, J. M. (1985). Re fl ectometer reports on human pigmentation. Curr. Anthrop. 26, 511 –512. Thomas, M. K., Lloyd-Jones, D. M., Thadhani, R. I., Shaw, A. C., Deraska, D. J., Kitch, B. T., Vamvakas, E. C., Dick, I. M., Prince, R. L. & Finkelstein, J. S. (1998). Hypovitaminosis D in medical inpatients. 

New Engl. J. Med. 338, 777 –783. Tiwari, S. C. (1963). Studies of crossing between Indians and Europeans. Ann. Hum. Genet. 26, 

219 –227. Tobias, P. V. (1963). Studies on skin re fl ectance in Bushman –European hybrids. In Second International Congress of Human Genetics , pp. 461 –471. Rome: Instituto G. Mendel. Tobias, P. V. (1974). The biology of the South African Negro. In (W. D. Hammond-Tooke, Ed.) The Bantu-Speaking Peoples of South Africa , pp. 3 –45. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Van Rijn-Tournel, J. (1966). Pigmentation de la peau de Belges et d’Africains. Bull. Soc. roy. Belge d’Anthropol. Pre ´hist. 76, 79 –96. Velie, E. M. & Shaw, G. M. (1996). Impact of prenatal diagnosis and elective termination on prevalence and risk estimates of neural tube defects in California, 1989 –1991. Am. J. Epidemiol. 144, 473 –479. Waiters, B., Godel, J. C. & Basu, T. K. (1999). Perinatal vitamin D and calcium status of northern Canadian mothers and their newborn infants. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 18, 122 –126. Walsh, R. J. (1963). Variations of melanin pigmen-tation of the skin in some Asian and Paci fi c peoples. 

Man 93, 126 –132. Wasserman, H. P. (1965). Human pigmentation and en-vironmental adaptation. Arch. Env. Health 11, 691 –694. Wassermann, H. P. (1974). Ethnic Pigmentation: Historical Physiological and Clinical Aspects .Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica. Wasserman, H. P. & Heyl, T. (1968). Quantitative data on skin pigmentation in South African races. S. Afr. Med. J. 42, 98 –101. Wauters, I. M. & Soesbergen, R. M. (1999). Disease caused by lack of sunlight: rickets and osteomalacia. 

Ned. Tijdschr. Geneeskd. 143, 593 –597. Webb, A. B., Kline, L. & Holick, M. F. (1988). In fl uence of season and latitude on the cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D 3 : synthesis in human skin. 

J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabol. 67, 373 –378. Weiner, J. S., Sebag-Monte fi ore, N. C. & Peterson, J. N. (1963). A note on the skin colour of the Aguarana Indians of Peru. Hum. Biol. 35, 470 –473. Weiner, J. S., Harrison, G. A., Singer, R., Harris, R. & Jopp, W. (1964). Skin colour in southern Africa. 

Hum. Biol. 36, 294 –307. Weninger, M. (1969). Spektrophotometrische Untersuchungen der Haut an einem Bantu-Stamm (Chope) aus Mocambique. Anthropologie 7, 53 –58. Wheeler, P. E. (1984). The evolution of bipedality and loss of functional body hair in hominids. J. hum. Evol. 13, 91 –98. Wheeler, P. E. (1996). The environmental context of functional body hair loss in hominids (a reply to Amaral, 1996). J. hum. Evol. 30, 367 –371. Whitehead, M., Lane, G., Young, O., Campbell, S., Abeyasekera, G., Hillyard, C. J., MacIntyre, I., Phang, K. G. & Stevenson, J. C. (1981). Interrela-tions of calcium-regulating hormones during normal pregnancy. Brit. Med. J. (Clinical Research Edition) 

283, 10 –12. Williams, M. A. J., Dunkerley, D. L., De Deckker, P., Kershaw, A. P. & Stokes, T. (1993). Quaternary Environments . London: Edward Arnold. Williams-Blangero, S. & Blangero, J. (1991). Skin color variation in eastern Nepal. Am. J. phys. Anthrop. 85, 

281 –291. 84 . .    .  Wilson, S. G., Retallack, R. W., Kent, J. C., Worth, G. K. & Gutteridge, D. H. (1990). Serum free 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and the free 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D index during a longitudinal study of human pregnancy and lactation. Clin. Endocrinol. 32, 613 –622. Wiskemann, A. & Wisser, H. (1956). Die Beziehung der directen Pigmentierung zur Konstitution. 

Strahlentherapie 99, 594 –599. Wiswell, T. E., Tuttle, D. J., Northam, R. S. & Simonds, G. R. (1990). Major congenital neurologic malfor-mations. A 17-year survey. Am. J. Dis. Child 144, 61 –67. 85       Appendix 

> Original skin re fl ectance data for indigenous human populations as de fi ned in the text .Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex Afghanistan/Iran  Afghanistan  Afghani/Iranian  MAlgeria Aures  Algeria  Aures  Chaouias from Bouzina  MAlgeria Aures  Algeria  Aures  Chaouias from Bouzina  FAustralia Darwin  Australia  Darwin  Aborigines  MBelgium  Belgium  Belgians 3  Belgians  BBelgium  Belgium  Brussels  Belgians  MBelgium  Belgium  Brussels  Belgians  FBelgium  Belgium  Brussels  Belgians (except 2 Greeks, 1 Iraqi)  MBelgium  Belgium  Brussels  Belgians (except 2 Greeks, 1 Iraqi)  FBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Central Bushmen  MBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Central Bushmen  FBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Yellow Bushmen at Lone Tree, Central San  MBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Yellow Bushmen at Lone Tree, Central San  FBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Yellow Bushmen at Takashwani, Central San  MBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Yellow Bushmen at Takashwani, Central San  FBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Yellow Bushmen at Ghanzi, Central San  MBotswana San  Botswana  Kalahari Desert  Yellow Bushmen at Ghanzi, Central San  FBrazil Caingan  Brazil  Parana  Caingang Indians  MBrazil Caingan  Brazil  Parana  Caingang Indians  FBrazil Guarani  Brazil  Parana  Guarini Indians  FBrazil Guarani  Brazil  Parana  Guarini Indians  MBurkina Faso Kurumba  Burkina Faso  Formerly Upper Volta  Kurumba from Roanga  FBurkina Faso Kurumba  Burkina Faso  Formerly Upper Volta  Kurumba from Roanga  MCambodia  Cambodia  Khmers  MCameroon Fali  Cameroon  (Northern)  Fali Tinguelin  MCameroon Fali  Cameroon  (Northern)  Fali Tinguelin  FCameroon Fali  Cameroon  (Northern)  Fali Kangou  MSex designations: F=female; M=male; B=both. All data are from published sources except for those indicated to be from  ‘‘ OSU-Beal ’s Database ’’ , which were kindly provided by Dr Kenneth Beals. Skin re fl ectances for  fi lters of di ff erent wavelength are identi fi ed by the wavelength only rather than their  fi lter number. (For instance, the 609  fi lter which measures skin re fl ectance at 685 nm is identi fi ed only as 685 nm.) The only original measurements converted from Photovolt to E.E.L. values were those from Colombia, which were converted using the formula for Belize Creoles of Lees & Byard, 1978.

86 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex Cameroon Fali  Cameroon  (Northern)  Fali Kangou  FChad Sara  Chad  Ndila  Sara Madjingay  MChad Sara  Chad  Ndila  Sara Madjingay  FChina Southern  China  MChina Southern  China  Hong Kong  Chinese  MChina Tibet  Tibet  India Mussoorie  Tibetans  MChina Tibet  Tibet  India Mussoorie  Tibetans  FColombia  Americas  Region De Planos  Guahibos  MEthiopia  Ethiopia  Residents of Adi-Arkai (1500 m altitude)  MEthiopia  Ethiopia  Residents of Adi-Arkai (1500 m altitude)  FEthiopia Highland  Ethiopia  Highlands  Residents of Debarech (3000 m altitude)  MEthiopia Highland  Ethiopia  Highlands  Residents of Debarech (3000 m altitude)  FGermany Mainz  Germany  Mainz  German and American Whites  MGreenland Southern  Greenland  Greenland East  Eskimo Ammassalimiut  MIndia  India  Angami Nagas  BIndia Bengal  India  Bengal  Low Caste  MIndia Bengal  India  Bengal  Kayastha  MIndia Bengal  India  Bengal  Brahman  MIndia Bengal  India  Bengal  Vaidya  MIndia Bengal  India  Calcutta  Rarhi Brahman  MIndia Goa  India  Goa  Goans  MIndia Nagpur  India  Nagpur and Kamptee  Mahar  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Baniya  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Jat Sikhs  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Haryana Jats  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Khatris  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Brahmans  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Aroras  MIndia Northern  India  North India  Aroras  FIndia Northern  India  North India  Khatris  FIndia Northern  India  Delhi  Saxena Kayastha (husband –wife –children)  FIndia Northern  India  Delhi  Saxena Kayastha (husband –wife –children)  MIndia Northern  India  Delhi  Saxena Kayastha (husband –wife –children)  BIndia Northern  India  Delhi  Aggarwal  MIndia Northern  India  Delhi  Aggarwal  FIndia Northern  India  England  North Indians (Higher Castes)  M

87       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex India Orissa  India  Koraput Town, Orissa  Bareng Paroja  MIndia Orissa  India  Koraput Town, Orissa  Bado Gadaba  MIndia Punjab  India  Delhi  Punjabi Indians (mother)  FIndia Punjab  India  Delhi  Punjabi Indians (father)  MIndia Punjab  India  Delhi  Punjabi Indians (son)  MIndia Punjab  India  Delhi  Punjabi Indians (daughter)  FIndia Punjab  India  England  Sikhs (husband –wife –children)  FIndia Punjab  India  England  Sikhs (husband –wife –children)  MIndia Punjab  India  England  Sikhs (husband –wife –children)  FIndia Punjab  India  England  Sikhs (husband –wife –children)  MIndia Punjab  India  Punjab  Khatris Punjab  MIndia Punjab  India  Sikhs 2  Sikhs  BIndia Rajasthan  India  North India  Rajputs  MIndia Southern  India  South India  MIran Nowshahr  Iran  Iran (Northern)  Nowshahr City  MIran Nowshahr  Iran  Iran (Northern)  Nowshahr City  FIraq Syria Kurds  Syria  Mainz  Syrians and Iranians  MIraq Syria Kurds  Iraq  Iraqi/Syrian  MIraq Syria Kurds  Iraq  Iraqi/Syrian  FIreland Balinlough  Ireland (Eire)  Ballinlough  MIreland Balinlough  Ireland (Eire)  Ballinlough  FIreland Carnew  Ireland (Eire)  Carnew  FIreland Carnew  Ireland (Eire)  Carnew  MIreland Longford  Ireland (Eire)  County Longford  BIreland Longford  Ireland (Eire)  County Longford  MIreland Longford  Ireland (Eire)  County Longford  FIreland Rossmore  Ireland (Eire)  Rossmore  FIreland Rossmore  Ireland (Eire)  Rossmore  MIsrael  Palestine  Palestine  MIsrael  Palestine  Palestine  FJapan Central  Japan  Japan (Central)  Japanese  MJapan Central  Japan  Japan (Central)  Japanese  FJapan Central  Japan  Central Japanese  Central Japanese  BJapan Central  Japan  Tokyo  Japanese  MJapan Hidaka  Hokkaido  Hidaka  Ainu  MJapan Hidaka  Hokkaido  Hidaka  Ainu  F

88 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex Japan Northern  Japan  Japan (North)  Japanese  MJapan Northern  Japan  Japan (North)  Japanese  FJapan Southwest  Japan  Southwest  Southwest  MJapan Southwest  Japan  Southwest  Southwest  FJordan  Jordan  Jordan  Non-village Arabs  MJordan  Jordan  Jordan  All Arabs  MJordan  Jordan  Jordan  MJordan Azzarqa  Jordan  Jordan Azraq depression  Arab villager, child  FJordan Azzarqa  Jordan  Jordan Azraq depression  Arab villagers  MKenya  Kenya  Kenya  MKurdish Jews  Iraq  Ne Baghdad  Kurdish Jews  MKurdish Jews  Iraq  Ne Baghdad  Kurdish Jews  MLebanon  Lebanon  Lebanese  MLebanon  Lebanon  Lebanese  FLiberia  Liberia  Germany Mainz  Africans from Ghana and Liberia  MLibya Cyrenaica  Libyia  Cyrenaica  MLibya Cyrenaica  Libyia  Cyrenaica  FLibya Fezzan  Libyia  Fezzan  MLibya Tripoli  Libyia  Tripolitania  MLibya Tripoli  Libyia  Tripolitania  FMalawi  Malawi  Mainly Cewa  MMali Dogon  Mali  Sanga and Boni  Dogon  MMali Dogon  Mali  Sanga and Boni  Dogon  FMorocco  Morocco  Moraccans  Morocans  BMorocco  Morocco  Morocco  MMozambique Chopi  Mozambique  Sofala  Chopi  MMozambique Chopi  Mozambique  Sofala  Chopi  FNamibia  Namibia  Kurungkuru Kraal  Kurungkuru Kraal  BNamibia  Namibia  Tondoro  Tondoro  BNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, Kuangali  MNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, Kuangali  FNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, Kuangali  MNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, Kuangali  FNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, M ’bukushu at Bagani  FNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, M ’bukushu at Bagani  MNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, M ’bukushu at Bagani  MNamibia Okavango  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Okavango Bantu, M ’bukushu at Bagani  F

89       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex Namibia Rehoboth Baster  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Black Bushmen at Bagani  MNamibia Rehoboth Baster  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Black Bushmen at Bagani  FNamibia Rehoboth Baster  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Black Bushmen at Bagani  MNamibia Rehoboth Baster  Namibia  Bordering on Angola  Black Bushmen at Bagani  FNamibia Rehoboth Baster  Namibia  Rehoboth  Basters  MNamibia Rehoboth Baster  Namibia  Rehoboth  Basters  FNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Jirel  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Sunwar  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Sherpa  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Tamang  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Brahman  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Chetri  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Average  BNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Jirel  MNepal Eastern  Nepal  Eastern  Jirel  FNetherlands  Netherlands  Dutch  BNetherlands  Netherlands  Dutch (mainly resident in Utrecht)  MNetherlands  Netherlands  Dutch (mainly resident in Utrecht)  FNigeria Ibo  Nigeria  Southern (Ibadan)  Ibo  MNigeria Yoruba  Nigeria  Southern (Ibadan)  Yoruba  MNigeria Yoruba  Nigeria  Southern (Ibadan)  Yoruba  FNigeria Yoruba  Nigeria  Lagos  Africans  MPakistan  Pakistan  Pakistan  MPakistan  Pakistan  Pakistan  FPakistan  Pakistan  MPapua Karker  Papua-New Guinea  Karkar Island  Karker Islanders  FPapua Lufa  Papua-New Guinea  Western Highlands  Lufa villagers  MPapua Lufa  Papua-New Guinea  Western Highlands  Lufa villagers  FPapua Mt Hagan  Papua-New Guinea  Mount Hagan  Western Highlands  MPapua Mt Hagan  Papua-New Guinea  Mount Hagan  Western Highlands  FPapua New Guinea  Papua-New Guinea  Papuans  Papuans  BPapua Port Moresby  Papua-New Guinea  Port Moresby  Hanuabada  BPeru Maranon  Peru  Maranon Valley  Aguarana Indians  MPeru Maranon  Peru  Maranon Valley  Aguarana Indians  FPeru Nunoa  Peru  Nunoa  Az  BPhilippines Manila  Philippines  Manila  Filipino  M

90 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex Russia Chechen  Russia  Chechnia  Chechen  FRussia Chechen  Russia  Chechnia  Chechen  MSaudi Arabia  Saudi  Saudi  MSouth Africa  South Africa  Johannesburg  S. A. Negroes (73% Tswana and Xhosa)  MSouth Africa  South Africa  Johannesburg  S. A. Negroes (73% Tswana and Xhosa)  FSouth Africa  South Africa  Bantu (96% Xhosa)  MSouth Africa  South Africa  Bantu (96% Xhosa)  FSouth Africa Cape  South Africa  Cape Province  Cape Coloureds  MSouth Africa Cape  South Africa  Cape Province  Cape Coloureds  FSouth Africa Cape  South Africa  Cape Province  Cape Coloureds  MSouth Africa Cape  South Africa  Cape Province  Cape Coloureds  FSouth Africa Hottentot  South Africa  Namaqualand  Hottentot  MSouth Africa Hottentot  South Africa  Namaqualand  Hottentot  FSouth Africa San Central  Namibia  Warmbath  Hottentot  MSouth Africa San Central  Namibia  Warmbath  Hottentot  FSpain Basques  Spain  Guipuzcoa  Basques  FSpain Basques  Spain  Guipuzcoa  Basques  MSpain Basques  Spain  Vizcaya  Basques  FSpain Basques  Spain  Vizcaya  Basques  MSpain Basques  Spain  Biscay  Basque and non-Basques  MSpain Leon  Spain  Leon  Meseta  MSpain Leon  Spain  Leon  Cabrera  MSpain Leon  Spain  Leon  Bierzo  MSpain Leon  Spain  Leon  Montana  MSpain Leon  Spain  Leon  Maragateria  MSudan  Sudan  Sudan  MSwaziland  South Africa  Johannesburg and Swaziland  Swazis  MSwaziland  South Africa  Johannesburg and Swaziland  Swazis  FSyria Druze  Jordan  Jordan Azraq Depression  Druze  MTanzania Nyatura  Tanzania  Nyatura  MTanzania Nyatura  Tanzania  Nyatura  FTanzania Sandewe  Tanzania  Sandawe  MTanzania Sandewe  Tanzania  Sandawe  FTunisia  Tunisia  Tunisians  Tunisians  BTurkey  Turkey  Turkey  MTurkey  Turkey  Turkey  F

91       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) Country or region  Subregion or city Population name given in study  Sex United Kingdom Cumberland  United Kingdom  Cumberland  FUnited Kingdom Cumberland  United Kingdom  Cumberland  MUnited Kingdom London  United Kingdom  London  Europeans  FUnited Kingdom London  United Kingdom  London  Europeans  MUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Northumberland  Holy Island  MUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Northumberland  Holy Island  FUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Liverpool  Europeans  BUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Northumberland  North Northumberland  FUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Northumberland  North Northumberland  MUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Northumberland  South-east Northumberland  FUnited Kingdom Northern  United Kingdom  Northumberland  South-east Northumberland  MUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  British Isles  Isle of Man  FUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  British Isles  Isle of Man  MUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  Wales  Merthyr Tyd fi l FUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  Wales  Merthyr Tyd fi l MUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  Wales (Southwest)  North Pembrokeshire  FUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  Wales (Southwest)  North Pembrokeshire  MUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  Wales (Southwest)  South Pembrokeshire  FUnited Kingdom Wales  United Kingdom  Wales (Southwest)  South Pembrokeshire  MVietnam  Vietnam  Vietnamese  MVietnam  Vietnam  Veitnamese  BZaire  Zaire  Zaire 2  Zaire  BZaire  Zaire  Congolese except 3 Cameroon females  MZaire  Zaire  Congolese except 3 Cameroon females  FZaire Konda  Zaire  Konda 0 ·9–18 ·2 Oto  MZaire Konda  Zaire  Konda 0 ·9–18 ·2 Twa  M

92 . .    .  Appendix 

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm Afghanistan/Iran  E 24 ·2 31 ·7Algeria Aures  EAlgeria Aures  EAustralia Darwin  EBelgium  EBelgium  E 36 ·5 37 ·7 33 ·5 44 ·7 46 ·7 46 ·7 38 ·6 44 ·8 42 ·7Belgium  E 35 ·7 36 ·5 32 ·7 43 ·5 45 ·3 45 ·7 38 ·2 44 ·6 42 ·3Belgium  E 37 ·1 39 ·1 33 ·8 45 ·5 46 ·6 46 ·1 38 ·6 43 ·8 42 ·5Belgium  E 36 ·3 38 ·2 32 ·8 43 ·7 44 ·5 44 ·8 38 ·1 43 ·2 41 ·9Botswana San  E 12 ·7 12 ·7 9·3 15 ·5 16 ·2 17 ·2 13 ·8 18 ·1 19 ·1Botswana San  E 13 ·2 13 ·7 9·7 16 ·6 17 ·4 18 ·2 14 ·4 19 ·0 20 ·0Botswana San  E 14 ·4Botswana San  E 15 ·2Botswana San  E 16 ·2Botswana San  E 17 ·2Botswana San  E 15 ·6Botswana San  E 16 ·4Brazil Caingan  E 16 ·5 22 ·9Brazil Caingan  E 18 ·4 26 ·1Brazil Guarani  E 17 ·2 23 ·4Brazil Guarani  E 16 ·8 23 ·6Burkina Faso Kurumba  E 8·6 10 ·8 6·3 12 ·0 11 ·0 11 ·0 8·4 11 ·6 12 ·2Burkina Faso Kurumba  E 8·8 11 ·4 6·4 12 ·5 11 ·6 11 ·4 8·6 12 ·0 12 ·5Cambodia  ECameroon Fali  E 6·5 7·3 5·0 7·4 7·4 7·6 5·7 7·9 7·7Cameroon Fali  E 6·7 7·7 5·1 7·6 7·6 7·9 5·9 8·2 8·1Cameroon Fali  E 6·7 7·4 5·2 7·7 7·7 8·0 6·0 8·4 8·1Cameroon Fali  E 7·2 8·1 5·3 8·0 8·0 8·5 6·3 8·7 9·0Chad Sara  EChad Sara  EChina Southern  EChina Southern  EChina Tibet  EChina Tibet  EColombia  PEthiopia  E 8·3 11 ·0Ethiopia  E 9·8 13 ·1

93       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm Ethiopia Highland  E 9·5 12 ·7Ethiopia Highland  E 10 ·3 14 ·3Germany Mainz  E 37 ·5 40 ·3 34 ·6 45 ·5 47 ·4 47 ·1 39 ·8 45 ·2 43 ·6Greenland Southern  E 22 ·4 29 ·9India  EIndia Bengal  E 13 ·6 13 ·9 10 ·1 17 ·0 18 ·2 19 ·9 15 ·1 20 ·4 20 ·2India Bengal  E 16 ·4 16 ·3 12 ·9 19 ·7 21 ·1 22 ·8 19 ·0 24 ·3 23 ·3India Bengal  E 17 ·1 17 ·2 13 ·4 20 ·4 21 ·7 24 ·0 19 ·6 24 ·3 24 ·1India Bengal  E 17 ·6 18 ·4 14 ·1 21 ·3 24 ·0 25 ·4 20 ·8 25 ·3 25 ·2India Bengal  E 17 ·1 18 ·3 13 ·4 20 ·3 21 ·9 23 ·2 19 ·8 24 ·5 24 ·2India Goa  EIndia Nagpur  E 12 ·3 13 ·3 9·2 14 ·8 15 ·7 16 ·9 13 ·4 18 ·2 18 ·7India Northern  E 14 ·3 22 ·0India Northern  E 15 ·4 23 ·6India Northern  E 15 ·7 24 ·0India Northern  E 16 ·5 25 ·1India Northern  E 17 ·2 26 ·0India Northern  E 20 ·7India Northern  E 21 ·1India Northern  E 21 ·7India Northern  E 14 ·9 13 ·9 11 ·6 17 ·1 18 ·9 19 ·6 17 ·3 21 ·5 21 ·2India Northern  E 17 ·0 16 ·8 13 ·4 20 ·3 22 ·8 23 ·5 20 ·1 24 ·8 24 ·4India Northern  E 15 ·6 14 ·5 12 ·1 18 ·0 19 ·9 20 ·9 18 ·2 22 ·3 22 ·4India Northern  EIndia Northern  EIndia Northern  E 18 ·6 21 ·4 14 ·9 25 ·2 26 ·5 28 ·0 22 ·2 27 ·9 26 ·6India Orissa  E 9·6 9·8 7·0 10 ·3 10 ·7 11 ·5 9·6 12 ·4 13 ·7India Orissa  E 9·7 10 ·3 7·1 10 ·7 11 ·2 11 ·8 12 ·7 14 ·1India Punjab  E 18 ·2 17 ·9 14 ·4 22 ·0 24 ·4 25 ·9 21 ·6 26 ·2 26 ·4India Punjab  E 18 ·6 18 ·8 14 ·8 23 ·3 25 ·5 27 ·0 22 ·2 27 ·0 27 ·0India Punjab  E 18 ·2 17 ·8 14 ·4 22 ·4 24 ·5 26 ·0 21 ·7 26 ·2 26 ·4India Punjab  E 18 ·7 18 ·6 14 ·9 23 ·0 25 ·5 27 ·0 22 ·4 27 ·2 27 ·3India Punjab  E 20 ·1 23 ·4 16 ·6 27 ·5 28 ·3 30 ·5 24 ·4 30 ·9 29 ·6India Punjab  E 19 ·5 23 ·1 16 ·0 27 ·0 27 ·7 29 ·5 23 ·6 29 ·7 28 ·5India Punjab  E 19 ·3 21 ·8 15 ·8 26 ·0 26 ·7 28 ·7 23 ·2 29 ·3 28 ·2India Punjab  E 18 ·4 20 ·5 15 ·0 24 ·2 25 ·0 27 ·0 22 ·0 27 ·4 26 ·8

94 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm India Punjab  E 21 ·3India Punjab  EIndia Rajasthan  E 16 ·2 24 ·7India Southern  EIran Nowshahr  E 17 ·9 18 ·2 14 ·6 21 ·6 24 ·4 26 ·6 21 ·1 27 ·2 25 ·8Iran Nowshahr  E 22 ·8 28 ·0 19 ·4 32 ·9 35 ·6 37 ·3 28 ·5 37 ·6 33 ·6Iraq Syria Kurds  E 35 ·7 38 ·9 32 ·4 41 ·2 42 ·7 43 ·3 38 ·1 43 ·0 41 ·6Iraq Syria Kurds  E 27 ·4 34 ·1Iraq Syria Kurds  E 31 ·2 39 ·1Ireland Balinlough  E 35 ·4 40 ·9Ireland Balinlough  E 36 ·2 41 ·9Ireland Carnew  E 37 ·2 42 ·1Ireland Carnew  E 34 ·9 39 ·4Ireland Longford  E 35 ·0 36 ·7 32 ·2 41 ·0 44 ·8 44 ·6 37 ·0 41 ·4 40 ·8Ireland Longford  EIreland Longford  EIreland Rossmore  E 35 ·7 41 ·8Ireland Rossmore  E 34 ·6 40 ·7Israel  E 26 ·4 33 ·6Israel  E 29 ·6 37 ·3Japan Central  E 18 ·8 15 ·1 24 ·4 26 ·3 27 ·0 22 ·6 27 ·7 27 ·3Japan Central  E 20 ·7 17 ·1 28 ·6 30 ·4 32 ·1 25 ·2 32 ·9 30 ·2Japan Central  E 26 ·7 30 ·5Japan Central  EJapan Hidaka  E 20 ·6 16 ·7 29 ·2 30 ·8 31 ·9 25 ·2 31 ·7 29 ·9Japan Hidaka  E 22 ·9 19 ·0 33 ·3 35 ·1 36 ·8 28 ·3 37 ·6 31 ·6Japan Northern  E 19 ·4 15 ·7 26 ·1 27 ·8 28 ·8 23 ·4 29 ·5 28 ·2Japan Northern  E 21 ·0 17 ·5 29 ·7 31 ·2 33 ·1 25 ·6 33 ·6 30 ·6Japan Southwest  E 18 ·1 14 ·5 23 ·0 24 ·3 25 ·7 21 ·4 26 ·9 26 ·3Japan Southwest  E 20 ·6 17 ·1 29 ·7 31 ·4 31 ·0 25 ·6 33 ·7 30 ·3Jordan  E 22 ·4 30 ·4Jordan  E 21 ·6 29 ·3Jordan  E 23 ·7 31 ·1Jordan Azzarqa  E 16 ·7 24 ·2Jordan Azzarqa  E 20 ·3 27 ·6Kenya  E 11 ·9 14 ·0

95       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm Kurdish Jews  E 21 ·1 29 ·2Kurdish Jews  E 24 ·2 33 ·7Lebanon  E 27 ·0 34 ·4Lebanon  E 28 ·7 36 ·6Liberia  E 9·0 13 ·6 7·2 12 ·1 12 ·2 13 ·3 8·8 13 ·7 13 ·1Libya Cyrenaica  E 19 ·0 26 ·6Libya Cyrenaica  E 24 ·3 32 ·3Libya Fezzan  E 14 ·9 20 ·7Libya Tripoli  E 19 ·8 27 ·4Libya Tripoli  E 24 ·7 33 ·6Malawi  E 9·0 1·2 10 ·0Mali Dogon  E 11 ·5 11 ·0 11 ·4 12 ·9 11 ·9 14 ·0Mali Dogon  E 11 ·8 11 ·2 11 ·5 13 ·1 11 ·9 14 ·4Morocco  EMorocco  E 21 ·2 28 ·1Mozambique Chopi  E 7·3Mozambique Chopi  E 7·7Namibia  ENamibia  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Okavango  ENamibia Rehoboth Baster  ENamibia Rehoboth Baster  ENamibia Rehoboth Baster  ENamibia Rehoboth Baster  ENamibia Rehoboth Baster  E 17 ·2Namibia Rehoboth Baster  E 20 ·6Nepal Eastern  E 16 ·5 25 ·2Nepal Eastern  E 17 ·7 26 ·3Nepal Eastern  E 19 ·7 29 ·5

96 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm Nepal Eastern  E 15 ·9 24 ·4Nepal Eastern  E 19 ·0 28 ·4Nepal Eastern  E 17 ·7 26 ·1Nepal Eastern  E 17 ·4 26 ·1Nepal Eastern  E 16 ·2 24 ·8Nepal Eastern  E 19 ·5 23 ·9Netherlands  ENetherlands  E 37 ·8 39 ·7 34 ·7 46 ·8 48 ·3 47 ·8 39 ·3 44 ·7 43 ·3Netherlands  E 36 ·4 37 ·7 33 ·1 44 ·6 45 ·8 45 ·8 38 ·0 43 ·2 42 ·0Nigeria Ibo  E 8·7 8·7 6·5 9·2 9·3 10 ·7 8·6 11 ·2 11 ·7Nigeria Yoruba  E 7·7 8·0 5·9 8·3 8·1 9·7 7·4 10 ·1 9·7Nigeria Yoruba  E 8·4 8·5 6·3 8·9 8·9 10 ·5 8·3 11 ·1 11 ·0Nigeria Yoruba  E 9·9 12 ·8 7·7 12 ·6 13 ·1 14 ·1 10 ·1 14 ·9 14 ·4Pakistan  E 20 ·5 26 ·9Pakistan  E 21 ·9 28 ·4Pakistan  EPapua Karker  E 10 ·1 15 ·0Papua Lufa  E 9·1 13 ·3Papua Lufa  E 9·3 13 ·8Papua Mt Hagan  EPapua Mt Hagan  EPapua New Guinea  EPapua Port Moresby  EPeru Maranon  E 24 ·5Peru Maranon  E 24 ·7Peru Nunoa  EPhilippines Manila  ERussia Chechen  E 21 ·2 29 ·1Russia Chechen  E 27 ·4 33 ·6Saudi Arabia  E 21 ·0 28 ·0South Africa  E 12 ·4 15 ·3 9·2 17 ·9 17 ·0 18 ·1 13 ·1 18 ·2 18 ·8South Africa  E 13 ·3 16 ·5 10 ·0 19 ·3 18 ·7 20 ·0 14 ·5 20 ·6 20 ·5South Africa  E 10 ·1 10 ·6 7·6 12 ·3 12 ·4 12 ·8 10 ·5 13 ·7 14 ·7South Africa  E 11 ·6 12 ·6 8·6 14 ·5 14 ·8 15 ·5 12 ·3 16 ·8 17 ·4South Africa Cape  E 16 ·1 15 ·8 12 ·5 19 ·4 20 ·5 21 ·5 18 ·7 22 ·7 23 ·1South Africa Cape  E 17 ·9 18 ·5 14 ·3 22 ·4 24 ·3 25 ·4 21 ·3 27 ·0 26 ·0

97       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm South Africa Cape  ESouth Africa Cape  ESouth Africa Hottentot  ESouth Africa Hottentot  ESouth Africa San Central  ESouth Africa San Central  ESpain Basques  E 31 ·0 29 ·2 28 ·5 35 ·9 40 ·9 40 ·9 34 ·4 40 ·9 38 ·7Spain Basques  E 31 ·6 30 ·0 28 ·7 37 ·0 41 ·2 40 ·9 34 ·1 39 ·6 38 ·3Spain Basques  E 30 ·8 29 ·0 28 ·1 35 ·5 40 ·1 40 ·4 34 ·0 40 ·0 38 ·3Spain Basques  E 31 ·5 30 ·0 28 ·7 36 ·6 41 ·1 40 ·7 34 ·2 39 ·6 38 ·4Spain Basques  E 32 ·6 34 ·1 29 ·0 36 ·2 38 ·3 39 ·8 35 ·1 39 ·5 38 ·6Spain Leon  E 31 ·1 29 ·0 14 ·3 36 ·4 39 ·0 24 ·4 36 ·8Spain Leon  E 29 ·3 26 ·3 33 ·4 36 ·5 36 ·1Spain Leon  E 30 ·0 27 ·4 34 ·4 37 ·1 35 ·5Spain Leon  E 30 ·8 28 ·5 36 ·0 37 ·8 35 ·1Spain Leon  E 28 ·4 25 ·1 12 ·7 31 ·8 34 ·8 33 ·4Sudan  E 12 ·2 14 ·7Swaziland  E 9·8 9·7 7·2 11 ·0 10 ·3 13 ·3 10 ·1 13 ·9 13 ·1Swaziland  E 11 ·2 10 ·5 8·2 12 ·2 12 ·3 14 ·9 12 ·0 16 ·5 15 ·9Syria Druze  E 22 ·5 30 ·0Tanzania Nyatura  E 7·8 10 ·2Tanzania Nyatura  E 8·6 10 ·6Tanzania Sandewe  E 8·8 11 ·1Tanzania Sandewe  E 9·1 11 ·7Tunisia  ETurkey  E 28 ·8 36 ·6Turkey  E 30 ·0 38 ·0United Kingdom Cumberland  E 36 ·9 42 ·4United Kingdom Cumberland  E 35 ·8 41 ·8United Kingdom London  E 34 ·4 34 ·3 30 ·8 41 ·4 43 ·1 43 ·9 35 ·6 40 ·5 39 ·7United Kingdom London  E 33 ·3 32 ·8 29 ·5 39 ·7 41 ·4 41 ·6 34 ·0 37 ·9 38 ·1United Kingdom Northern  E 34 ·1 39 ·8United Kingdom Northern  E 34 ·1 39 ·6United Kingdom Northern  E 35 ·0 36 ·1 31 ·4 41 ·6 43 ·0 43 ·7 36 ·5 41 ·0 40 ·4United Kingdom Northern  E 35 ·3 36 ·5 32 ·8 42 ·1 45 ·8 46 ·4 38 ·5 44 ·8 42 ·5United Kingdom Northern  E 33 ·9 34 ·2 31 ·3 40 ·0 43 ·8 45 ·3 37 ·3 43 ·8 41 ·4

98 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5) EEL (E) or photovolt (P)  420 nm  425 nm  450 nm  465 nm  485 nm  515 nm  525 nm  545 nm  550 nm United Kingdom Northern  E 34 ·7 35 ·6 32 ·1 41 ·1 44 ·6 45 ·5 37 ·8 43 ·9 41 ·8United Kingdom Northern  E 33 ·2 33 ·0 30 ·4 38 ·9 42 ·7 44 ·0 36 ·2 42 ·1 40 ·4United Kingdom Wales  E 36 ·8 41 ·8United Kingdom Wales  E 36 ·6 41 ·9United Kingdom Wales  E 33 ·2 38 ·7United Kingdom Wales  E 32 ·8 38 ·7United Kingdom Wales  E 35 ·6 40 ·9United Kingdom Wales  E 34 ·2 16 ·4 40 ·8United Kingdom Wales  E 34 ·1 40 ·5United Kingdom Wales  E 33 ·7 39 ·6Vietnam  EVietnam  EZaire  EZaire  E 9·0 7·4 6·6 8·6 9·0 9·7 8·9 10 ·4 12 ·3Zaire  E 10 ·5 9·0 7·6 10 ·7 11 ·5 12 ·5 10 ·6 12 ·8 14 ·8Zaire Konda  E 2·3Zaire Konda  E

99       Appendix 

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data Afghanistan/Iran  55 ·7 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Algeria Aures  57 ·4 (Chamla & Demoulin, 1978)  (Robins, 1991) Algeria Aures  58 ·7 (Chamla & Demoulin, 1978)  (Robins, 1991) Australia Darwin  12 ·9 19 ·3 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Belgium  60 ·1 FOS73 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Belgium  48 ·9 59 ·5 45 ·6 65 ·7 66 ·5 67 ·3 (Leguebe, 1961)  (Robins, 1991) Belgium  48 ·8 58 ·5 45 ·1 64 ·3 65 ·4 65 ·9 (Leguebe, 1961)  (Robins, 1991) Belgium  47 ·5 57 ·4 45 ·0 62 ·9 65 ·1 64 ·5 (Van Rijn-Tournel, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Belgium  47 ·2 57 ·3 44 ·5 62 ·6 64 ·2 63 ·7 (Van Rijn-Tournel, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  21 ·1 28 ·4 20 ·5 39 ·4 32 ·0 42 ·5 (Tobias, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  22 ·5 30 ·2 21 ·3 40 ·8 33 ·0 43 ·6 (Tobias, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  40 ·5 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  43 ·1 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  43 ·0 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  43 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  43 ·0 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Botswana San  44 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Brazil Caingan  48 ·1 (Harrison & Salzano, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Brazil Caingan  50 ·7 (Harrison & Salzano, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Brazil Guarani  46 ·5 (Harrison & Salzano, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Brazil Guarani  47 ·9 (Harrison & Salzano, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Burkina Faso Kurumba  13 ·0 17 ·1 12 ·2 27 ·1 21 ·7 27 ·9 (Huizinga, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) Burkina Faso Kurumba  13 ·5 17 ·4 12 ·5 28 ·0 22 ·4 29 ·3 (Huizinga, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) Cambodia  50 ·2 54 ·0 (Carbonnel & Oliver, 1966); red estimated  (Harrison, 1973) Cameroon Fali  8·5 11 ·3 8·3 16 ·1 15 ·9 20 ·0 (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Cameroon Fali  8·8 12 ·0 8·2 16 ·9 16 ·3 20 ·9 (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Cameroon Fali  8·9 11 ·9 8·3 16 ·8 16 ·5 21 ·1 (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Cameroon Fali  9·3 12 ·6 9·0 18 ·6 18 ·4 25 ·5 (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Chad Sara  23 ·2 (Hiernaux, 1972)  (Robins, 1991) Chad Sara  26 ·0 (Hiernaux, 1972)  (Robins, 1991) China Southern  56 ·6 59 ·9 (Carbonnel & Oliver, 1966); red estimated  (Harrison, 1973) China Southern  54 ·3 57 ·7 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original China Tibet  54 ·5 (Kalla & Tirwari, 1970)  (Robins, 1991) China Tibet  54 ·9 (Kalla & Tirwari, 1970)  (Robins, 1991) Colombia  24 ·6 (Diaz Ungria, 1965)  (Harrison, 1973)

100 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data Ethiopia  30 ·2 (Harrison  et al. , 1969)  (Robins, 1991) Ethiopia  33 ·2 (Harrison  et al. , 1969)  (Robins, 1991) Ethiopia Highland  31 ·4 (Harrison  et al. , 1969)  (Robins, 1991) Ethiopia Highland  35 ·7 (Harrison  et al. , 1969)  (Robins, 1991) Germany Mainz  50 ·1 60 ·6 46 ·3 66 ·7 66 ·9 66 ·9 (Ojikutu, 1965)  (Robins, 1991) Greenland Southern  55 ·7 (Ducros  et al. , 1975)  (Robins, 1991) India  44 ·6 OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database India Bengal  24 ·1 29 ·9 22 ·1 41 ·5 34 ·2 44 ·8 (Buchi, 1957)  (Robins, 1991) India Bengal  27 ·4 35 ·6 28 ·1 45 ·3 43 ·7 48 ·6 (Buchi, 1957)  (Robins, 1991) India Bengal  28 ·5 36 ·3 29 ·3 47 ·5 45 ·1 49 ·9 (Buchi, 1957)  (Robins, 1991) India Bengal  30 ·2 37 ·9 30 ·0 47 ·2 45 ·9 50 ·7 (Buchi, 1957)  (Robins, 1991) India Bengal  29 ·1 36 ·9 29 ·5 47 ·7 45 ·2 49 ·7 (Das & Mukherjee, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) India Goa  42 ·0 46 ·4 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original India Nagpur  21 ·6 28 ·4 19 ·6 37 ·6 31 ·3 41 ·3 (Das & Mukherjee, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  48 ·6 (Jaswal, 1979)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  50 ·6 (Jaswal, 1979)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  51 ·5 (Jaswal, 1979)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  52 ·7 (Jaswal, 1979)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  52 ·8 (Jaswal, 1979)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  55 ·8 (Kalla, 1969)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  56 ·1 (Kalla, 1969)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  56 ·4 (Kalla, 1969)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  24 ·8 32 ·8 25 ·7 41 ·5 40 ·8 45 ·8 (Kalla, 1972)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  29 ·0 37 ·6 29 ·3 46 ·5 45 ·2 50 ·4 (Kalla, 1972)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  26 ·0 34 ·4 27 ·0 43 ·7 42 ·6 48 ·0 (Kalla, 1972)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  49 ·5 (Kalla, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  50 ·0 (Kalla, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) India Northern  31 ·5 40 ·5 31 ·4 49 ·4 47 ·6 52 ·5 (Tiwari, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) India Orissa  14 ·6 20 ·0 14 ·3 28 ·8 24 ·3 31 ·8 (Das & Mukherjee, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) India Orissa  15 ·2 20 ·7 14 ·6 29 ·7 24 ·8 32 ·3 (Das & Mukherjee, 1963)  (Robins, 1991) India Punjab  31 ·2 40 ·5 31 ·5 49 ·7 48 ·0 53 ·6 (Banerjee, 1984)  Original India Punjab  31 ·8 41 ·4 32 ·2 50 ·8 48 ·8 54 ·5 (Banerjee, 1984)  Original India Punjab  30 ·9 40 ·6 31 ·6 50 ·0 48 ·3 54 ·3 (Banerjee, 1984)  Original India Punjab  32 ·3 41 ·8 32 ·5 51 ·0 49 ·2 54 ·9 (Banerjee, 1984)  Original India Punjab  36 ·5 45 ·3 34 ·6 52 ·0 51 ·1 55 ·6 (Kahlon, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) India Punjab  34 ·8 43 ·5 33 ·4 50 ·6 49 ·8 54 ·5 (Kahlon, 1973)  (Robins, 1991)

101       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data India Punjab  34 ·6 43 ·1 33 ·2 50 ·4 49 ·5 54 ·1 (Kahlon, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) India Punjab  32 ·6 41 ·0 31 ·6 48 ·4 47 ·7 52 ·4 (Kahlon, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) India Punjab  56 ·1 (Kalla, 1969)  (Robins, 1991) India Punjab  54 ·0 ROB72 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database India Rajasthan  52 ·0 (Jaswal, 1979)  (Robins, 1991) India Southern  42 ·4 46 ·7 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Iran Nowshahr  31 ·2 39 ·7 30 ·2 46 ·5 45 ·8 50 ·0 (Mehrai & Sunderland, 1990)  (Robins, 1991) Iran Nowshahr  41 ·9 50 ·9 38 ·6 56 ·6 55 ·7 59 ·7 (Mehrai & Sunderland, 1990)  (Robins, 1991) Iraq Syria Kurds  46 ·7 57 ·7 44 ·2 62 ·3 63 ·6 64 ·0 (Ojikutu, 1965)  (Robins, 1991) Iraq Syria Kurds  57 ·4 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Iraq Syria Kurds  60 ·2 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Ireland Balinlough  65 ·3 (Sunderland  et al. , 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Ireland Balinlough  65 ·1 (Sunderland  et al. , 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Ireland Carnew  64 ·6 (Sunderland  et al. , 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Ireland Carnew  64 ·4 (Sunderland  et al. , 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Ireland Longford  46 ·2 58 ·2 43 ·7 63 ·1 64 ·7 64 ·9 (Lees  et al. , 1979)  Original Ireland Longford  64 ·9 (Lees  et al. , 1979)  Original Ireland Longford  65 ·2 (Lees  et al. , 1979)  Original Ireland Rossmore  64 ·8 (Sunderland  et al. , 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Ireland Rossmore  64 ·7 (Sunderland  et al. , 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Israel  57 ·6 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Israel  58 ·8 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Japan Central  33 ·0 42 ·8 32 ·4 50 ·5 48 ·7 53 ·3 (Hulse, 1967)  (Robins, 1991) Japan Central  37 ·1 46 ·4 35 ·1 53 ·2 51 ·7 55 ·7 (Hulse, 1967)  (Robins, 1991) Japan Central  54 ·6 (Harvey & Lord, 1978; Hulse, 1967)  Original Japan Central  54 ·3 57 ·8 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Japan Hidaka  35 ·6 46 ·0 35 ·0 54 ·3 52 ·1 57 ·4 (Harvey & Lord, 1978)  Original Japan Hidaka  41 ·0 51 ·1 36 ·1 58 ·2 59 ·4 60 ·8 (Harvey & Lord, 1978)  Original Japan Northern  34 ·0 44 ·1 33 ·2 51 ·4 49 ·5 54 ·1 (Hulse, 1967)  (Robins, 1991) Japan Northern  37 ·9 46 ·8 35 ·5 53 ·5 52 ·0 55 ·7 (Hulse, 1967)  (Robins, 1991) Japan Southwest  31 ·7 41 ·6 31 ·2 49 ·0 47 ·2 51 ·6 (Hulse, 1967)  (Robins, 1991) Japan Southwest  37 ·9 47 ·0 35 ·5 53 ·4 51 ·9 55 ·5 (Hulse, 1967)  (Robins, 1991) Jordan  52 ·7 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Jordan  52 ·2 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Jordan  54 ·1 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original

102 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data Jordan Azzarqa  48 ·0 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Jordan Azzarqa  51 ·5 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Kenya  32 ·4 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Kurdish Jews  54 ·9 (Lourie, 1973)  Original Kurdish Jews  60 ·0 (Lourie, 1973)  Original Lebanon  58 ·0 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Lebanon  58 ·4 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Liberia  15 ·6 21 ·2 12 ·5 25 ·4 22 ·3 29 ·4 (Ojikutu, 1965)  (Robins, 1991) Libya Cyrenaica  53 ·0 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Libya Cyrenaica  54 ·0 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Libya Fezzan  44 ·0 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Libya Tripoli  53 ·6 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Libya Tripoli  55 ·2 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Malawi  27 ·0 (Tobias, 1974)  (Robins, 1991) Mali Dogon  13 ·7 18 ·2 19 ·4 32 ·4 27 ·8 33 ·7 (Huizinga, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) Mali Dogon  14 ·0 18 ·5 19 ·9 33 ·5 28 ·4 34 ·5 (Huizinga, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) Morocco  56 ·4 FOS73 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Morocco  53 ·3 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Mozambique Chopi  17 ·8 (Weninger, 1969)  (Robins, 1991) Mozambique Chopi  21 ·1 (Weninger, 1969)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia  26 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  OSU-Beals s database Namibia  24 ·5 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  OSU-Beals s database Namibia Okavango  21 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  22 ·1 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  24 ·2 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  25 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  22 ·2 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  22 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  22 ·4 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Okavango  25 ·5 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Rehoboth Baster  28 ·2 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Rehoboth Baster  29 ·4 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Rehoboth Baster  28 ·0 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Rehoboth Baster  32 ·4 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Rehoboth Baster  47 ·9 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Namibia Rehoboth Baster  51 ·9 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991)

103       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data Nepal Eastern  48 ·9 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  51 ·5 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  53 ·6 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  48 ·7 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  52 ·1 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  50 ·0 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  50 ·1 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  49 ·5 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Nepal Eastern  55 ·7 (Williams-Blangero & Blangero, 1991)  Original Netherlands  66 ·5 HRM64 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Netherlands  49 ·0 60 ·9 46 ·1 67 ·5 67 ·9 68 ·9 (Ritger-Aris, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Netherlands  47 ·4 58 ·7 44 ·8 65 ·3 66 ·0 66 ·7 (Ritger-Aris, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) Nigeria Ibo  12 ·6 17 ·0 12 ·4 24 ·6 21 ·7 28 ·2 (Barnicot, 1958)  (Robins, 1991) Nigeria Yoruba  10 ·9 14 ·3 10 ·4 20 ·6 18 ·8 23 ·6 (Barnicot, 1958)  (Robins, 1991) Nigeria Yoruba  12 ·2 16 ·2 11 ·8 23 ·1 20 ·6 26 ·1 (Barnicot, 1958)  (Robins, 1991) Nigeria Yoruba  16 ·9 22 ·5 14 ·4 28 ·3 24 ·7 32 ·5 (Ojikutu, 1965)  (Robins, 1991) Pakistan  52 ·0 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Pakistan  51 ·3 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Pakistan  49 ·8 53 ·6 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Papua Karker  33 ·2 (Harvey & Lord, 1978)  (Robins, 1991) Papua Lufa  30 ·8 (Harvey & Lord, 1978)  (Robins, 1991) Papua Lufa  31 ·6 (Harvey & Lord, 1978)  (Robins, 1991) Papua Mt Hagan  29 ·5 21 ·9 34 ·8 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Papua Mt Hagan  30 ·7 22 ·5 35 ·9 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Papua New Guinea  35 ·3 HAR71 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Papua Port Moresby  36 ·2 25 ·3 41 ·0 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Peru Maranon  42 ·8 (Weiner  et al. , 1963)  (Robins, 1991) Peru Maranon  43 ·3 (Weiner  et al. , 1963)  (Robins, 1991) Peru Nunoa  47 ·7 CON72 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Philippines Manila  50 ·3 54 ·1 (Walsh, 1963); red estimated  Original Russia Chechen  51 ·9 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Russia Chechen  55 ·0 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Saudi Arabia  52 ·5 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original South Africa  20 ·7 27 ·8 19 ·3 39 ·0 30 ·8 41 ·7 (Robins, 1991)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa  23 ·4 31 ·2 21 ·1 41 ·5 33 ·1 44 ·3 (Robins, 1991)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa  16 ·4 22 ·5 15 ·4 30 ·1 25 ·2 32 ·1 (Wasermann & Heyl, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa  19 ·7 26 ·5 18 ·1 35 ·0 29 ·4 38 ·9 (Wasermann & Heyl, 1968)  (Robins, 1991)

104 . .    .  Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data South Africa Cape  26 ·8 36 ·1 27 ·9 45 ·2 43 ·7 49 ·2 (Wasermann & Heyl, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa Cape  31 ·0 40 ·3 30 ·9 48 ·6 47 ·1 52 ·1 (Wasermann & Heyl, 1968)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa Cape  50 ·1 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa Cape  51 ·3 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa Hottentot  45 ·5 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa Hottentot  48 ·1 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa San Central  41 ·9 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) South Africa San Central  45 ·6 (Weiner  et al. , 1964)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Basques  45 ·6 56 ·0 42 ·3 64 ·5 64 ·2 66 ·4 (Rebato, 1987)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Basques  44 ·1 55 ·0 41 ·7 63 ·4 63 ·8 65 ·5 (Rebato, 1987)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Basques  44 ·9 55 ·2 41 ·8 63 ·9 63 ·6 65 ·8 (Rebato, 1987)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Basques  44 ·5 55 ·0 41 ·7 63 ·3 63 ·7 65 ·3 (Rebato, 1987)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Basques  42 ·9 52 ·6 41 ·6 61 ·1 61 ·6 62 ·3 (Rebato, 1987)  Original Spain Leon  62 ·8 66 ·1 (Caro, 1980)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Leon  61 ·0 64 ·6 (Caro, 1980)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Leon  60 ·6 64 ·3 (Caro, 1980)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Leon  60 ·4 64 ·0 (Caro, 1980)  (Robins, 1991) Spain Leon  59 ·5 62 ·7 (Caro, 1980)  (Robins, 1991) Sudan  35 ·5 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Swaziland  14 ·5 18 ·4 14 ·3 27 ·6 24 ·3 32 ·4 (Roberts  et al. , 1986)  (Robins, 1991) Swaziland  18 ·1 22 ·7 17 ·3 32 ·8 28 ·8 38 ·8 (Roberts  et al. , 1986)  (Robins, 1991) Syria Druze  52 ·8 (Sunderland & Coope, 1973)  Original Tanzania Nyatura  25 ·3 Weiner, 1969 cited in (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Tanzania Nyatura  26 ·3 Weiner, 1969 cited in (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Tanzania Sandewe  28 ·1 Weiner, 1969 cited in (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Tanzania Sandewe  29 ·7 Weiner, 1969 cited in (Ritgers-Aris, 1973 b) (Robins, 1991) Tunisia  56 ·3 FOS73 from Oregon data  OSU-Beals s database Turkey  59 ·3 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original Turkey  59 ·0 (Sunderland, 1979)  Original United Kingdom Cumberland  67 ·0 (Smith & Mitchell, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Cumberland  66 ·5 (Smith & Mitchell, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom London  43 ·9 54 ·3 42 ·6 61 ·5 63 ·3 63 ·1 (Barnicot, 1958)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom London  41 ·4 52 ·4 40 ·9 59 ·9 62 ·0 61 ·5 (Barnicot, 1958)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Northern  63 ·4 (Cartwright, 1975)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Northern  62 ·3 (Cartwright, 1975)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Northern  45 ·2 54 ·8 43 ·1 61 ·7 63 ·2 62 ·3 (Harrison & Owen, 1964)  (Robins, 1991)

105       Appendix ( Continued )

> Population designation (as in Table 5)  575 nm  595 nm  600 nm  655 nm  670 nm  685 nm  Original reference  Source of data United Kingdom Northern  50 ·0 59 ·6 45 ·7 66 ·7 66 ·9 68 ·9 (Hulse, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Northern  48 ·9 58 ·7 44 ·8 66 ·2 66 ·0 68 ·6 (Hulse, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Northern  48 ·9 59 ·1 45 ·0 65 ·9 66 ·1 68 ·3 (Hulse, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Northern  47 ·4 56 ·8 43 ·7 64 ·4 64 ·8 66 ·8 (Hulse, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  67 ·0 (Smith & Mitchell, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  65 ·9 (Smith & Mitchell, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  63 ·5 (Smith & Mitchell, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  62 ·8 (Smith & Mitchell, 1973)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  63 ·1 (Sunderland & Woolley, 1982)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  62 ·9 (Sunderland & Woolley, 1982)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  62 ·7 (Sunderland & Woolley, 1982)  (Robins, 1991) United Kingdom Wales  62 ·4 (Sunderland & Woolley, 1982)  (Robins, 1991) Vietnam  51 ·3 55 ·0 (Carbonnel & Olivier, 1966); red estimated  (Harrison, 1973) Vietnam  56 ·8 FOS73 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Zaire  33 ·9 FOS73 from OSU-Beals s database  OSU-Beals s database Zaire  13 ·3 18 ·2 13 ·3 25 ·6 23 ·0 29 ·6 (Van Rijn-Tournel, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Zaire  15 ·4 21 ·7 16 ·0 30 ·1 26 ·6 36 ·1 (Van Rijn-Tournel, 1966)  (Robins, 1991) Zaire Konda  28 ·8 (Hiernaux, 1977)  Original Zaire Konda  30 ·0 (Hiernaux, 1977)  Original

106 . .    . 
