# The Caucasus

NOTE. 

ALEXAXDER B- was  a captain in the  Rwian  dragoon  gnarda. 

For  his  participation in  the  insurrection of 1825, he was sentenced to  hnrd  

> 1.t

# - - . I- -- - ----"- -me  Laucaaus.  Shortly after  his  being  restored  to the rank of an officer, 

he  was  killed  by  the  Ckcwsians,  but his body  waa  never found. As a portrait  of  Beatoujef  waa  published at the h a d of  his  works, not 

with  his name, bat with that of  '< Mmlin&.**  the  Grand  Tlnbn  M;nh=-r  said . *  - .---- --" -*.,u*=. 

to  the Czar:  "PouwiU  surely not  dlow  that people who  have  merited  C,  ,

hanged  should  be  thua  conspicuonsly  exhibited." U J E T H E DISTINGUISHED  PFARRIOR-AUTHOR  

> 5

- AND THE GREAT EXILE. 

ha.  WITH  TfIE  MOST PROFOUND VENERATION.  

> .n

ha 

The Grand Duke  possessed,  in a high  degreeJ  the  quality  ofthose  who,  

> YI

Voltaire  up,  have  no  mind-lir,  the  faciliq  of making  blmdem. 

Mardinof,  the  h&d  of the  c i a  detective  police,  whohaa  mntedp.rn&iom 

to print the  portrait  of the author-soldier, was disgraced.         

> PBlTS1, DlJEZ, U D OD., C ~ A P Y I D B , AXn lrHW rPP-T, BLACPB--

T H I S WORK I S DEDIC ATED, 

> --

iv  COSTESTS. 

> F A G B

CHAPTER  111. 

An  Equcftrid  Excursion on  thc  side of the Caspian Sea, by  Bcstoujef-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Fernerebe  to the Caspian. 39 

CIX4PTER  IV. 

MESATE. 

... T.  ..viva mi serrana Con su  pe'  andaluz  ;

Ella  ei  m i  sobernna, 

.... Mi  vida  y mi  cmz.. 

Sus  ojos son  veneno 

# . . . . . . . . . Su mirar mi luz DESCRIPTION OF THE  C O U N T K ~ . 

Caucasus-Elbrous-Kasbek-Confusion concerning that Name-Ascensions -Veneration of  the  Mountains among the  Ossetians--Paitigorsk-

Composition of the  Chain-Passagcs-The  Black and Caspian Seas-The Rivera of the Caucasus-Kouban  -Te~k-Kour -Rhion-Koissu-

# . . . . . . . . . . Their tributary  Streams-\Vant  of Lakes. 73 

CHAPTER  TI. 

ETHNOGRAPHY.  -

Population-Circassim  Race, its  beauty-Adighe-Mannem-Lesghhna- 

> .

Tchetchenes  -Abhsses  - Ossetians  -Allans  -Souanes  -Ingoushe8  -- Kahardians-Georgians,  their mode of  life-Immcretians,  their  watume, 

libations and  dancing-Mineelm-Princes  Dadiani-Armenians,  their 

qualities-Tnrtars,  their language-Koumikes-Cossacks, development of 

their  Colonies  or  Stanitzaa--Colonies  of  Kars,  of  Nadjar,  of  Vladimirovka.  79 

THE TOWNS OF THE CAUCASUS. 

tai+Mout-Kal6-So~chann-Xd8-An~pa  -Erivm-

# - -8tamp~l-Bakon-Derbend-Kouba.  . . . . . . . . . . . 

CHAPTER X. 

uins  and  Convents-Disastrous  Climates-Mortality in the Russian Garrisons-The Means  ta  Prevent  it;The  Temple of  Pitzunder-Mzketha 

CHaPTER  XI. -

CONTENTS.  T

> FAOX

CHAPTER  VII. 

EXPLORATION OF  T E E  CAUCASUS.  / ' 

The  JIarch  of the  Ark  -Prometheus-The Amazons of  Herodotus-Expe& 

tion  of the Argonauts-That of Alexander the  Great-Mithridates-Strabo 

-Byzantius-Arabian  Authors and their Knowledge of the  Caucaus-

Russian Princes-Invasions of the Mongols-Gengis-khan-Timour -. . . . . . . . Missionaries-Genves Works on the Caucasus. 93 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

PRODUCTIOBS  OF THE CAUCASUS.  

> .

Mineral Kingdom -Vegetable  Kingdom  -Animal Kingdom -Climate-Industry of the  Inhabitants.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I05 

CHAPTER  IX. vi CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XII. 

> FAGS

Marches-DifEcultiea  for the Rusaian  Amy-EnaampmentsManners  of the Soldiers and  Officer+Razziaa-Arms  of the  Circassians-Treatment 

of Prisoner-Degraded Officers-Deserters-Kouznetzoff-Retreats of  the 

Russians-War in the Caucasus endless  . . . . . . . . . . .  145 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

DAGHESTAN. 

Limita  -Inhabitants -- The  Lesghiann  of  Avaria  - Saklis  -Gardens  -

Women -Marriages  -Mi&  - Bridges -The Parcelling of the Land- -

Suphism-Retaliation.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159 CHAPTER  XIV. 

RUSSIAN  ARMENIA. 

The different Names of the  henians-Their  Origin-Conquest of  Cyrur 

# -Introduction of Christianity-Schism-Extinction of the  Kings-

Domination of the  Ruesiana-Sanlar  Houstein-Emigration-The  Patri-arch of  Echrnia&in-Insurrection  at  Eriyan  in 1846-The  Armenian 

Language-Ararat-Lakes-Climate.  . . . . . . . . . . .  167 

CHAPTER XV. FACTS AND FICTIONS. 

frirone+Taganl~f-Coss~ck  Ivan-Eourinski  Soldier-The Prisoner of  the 

Ceucasns--by  the Count X. de Maistre-by the Author-by  Pooshkinc 

Brigands-Abdoulah-Bey -The  grateful  Mullah  -Lermontof-Iemael-

Bey. 173 a great boon for him, who had returned from  -

# cold Siberia, from the mines, and compulsory labour. Now, what was his crime ? He had courage-ously attempted to seize upon the Czar's thunder-bolt, and to break the chains of his countrymen. He had robed the light which shone on the iniquities of the Czar's counsellors. Indeed, he of whom  Miskiewicz  said-

# ''  Thak  hand  which Bestoujef held out to me, had been torn from  bis  sword and pen, and had been attached by the Czar to the  convid'e  cart"-

# Ile  of whom  Schamisso  said-            

> "Ich bin Bestuscheff, den viele Zungen
> Ryleiffs Miherschworenen genaant,
> Dem er sein hohee Schwanenlied gesungen"-

## .

# The man who had excited universal  admira: 

# tion-has  certainly  no need of a  monument  raised by my  feeble  hands; therefore my  only  purpose ' .  . _ - _ _ ,

# is to adorn my book with  his  name ; with a name > -.: 

# illustrious  - in the annals of the exiles ; with the  " 

> ,

# - i,' 

# name of the author to whom the Caucasus owes . . ' r-' 

# the description of its  fmest  regions. 

# ?.  . -   

> London, June, 1853.

## - . 

# P R E F 1 4 C E .    

> Progress of the Russians

# -Interest connected with the Caucasus -Prediction -A Chief wanted -The  Russia~s   

> cannot stop in their Conquests.

# s, silently and unperceived by Europe, er  power  in the East. Whilst the English were only discovering Archangel, the 

# csak  Ivan made' the conquest of Astrakhan. 

# ,by  calling  the Russian Czar prince 

# .din, was  not aware  thst  he mutilated-the 

# p a  ~ a b a r d a h .  peter  I.  settled  on the Caspian the view of opening a road to  1n&a, 

# e England  6egm  to suspect the strength 

# sian  Colossus. I n fad, the designs of at' monarch are fully revealed by his  will,  by 

# ch  he urges his descendants to aim -at the 

# nquest  of the world. 8 PREFACE. 

## Nevertheless, it is doubtful whether Catherine 

# 11.  would  have been able to seize upon the  Crimea, 

## had she not been supported by Joseph II., and by the hatred which then existed in Europe against the Mussulmans. It was only after the partition of Poland that  theEuropean  powers began to see clearly into the designs of Russia. Louis 

# XV.  was heard to say, "That he would have given his last carriage to prevent the accomplish-ment of that iniquity." But France was too  far 

## removed from Russia, and so she was in 1830. The press has nobly acted its part, and has eloquently called the serious attention of the European powers to the slow and ominous  con-

## questof  the Caucasusby Russia.  ButtheEngEsh 

## government, disregarding the warning of enlight-ened politicians, has  recognised  the right of Russia to blockade the eastern coast of the Black 

# Sea.  I 

> j,

## The conquest of  Circassia  will therefore be accomplished, but it will be a hard task for Russia to maintain under her subjection the va-

## lorous mountaineers of that region. Moreover, she will then have,  at  the two extremities of her  

> PBEPACE. 9

# - . - bmpire,  two  gnawing  worms-Poland  and  the 1 ; .   

> 'h.

# .. Caucasus.  

> *<

- - There are but  few  countries where nature  

> ,

## has displayed so much poetry as in the Caucasus. 

# ..  -  

> %-

# Its  generd  surface has something more strikingly 

# -..  

> ;"

## beautiful than that of the Alps;  and  its inhabi-

# f_  . tants are justly celebrated for their beauty and   

> ;?-L

## ~icturesaue~costume. 

# It is now the theatre of events, interesting 

:; in the highest degree. It is a noble duty to  

> ;

## record the: heroic deeds of populations which 

## m a e c e n t l y  teach all oppressed nations how t o 

# i' 

## b.  fight and struggle for national independence. B

## % F a i t h ,  it is true, fires the heart of the  ~irczmians, 

> rb

# : and their fanaticism  supdies  military tactics   

> $>* -.

h but-their  courage  is not the less  worthy  -of  our 

# 5,  idrniration.   

> k.,

# : / According to a  Circassian  tradition, a powerful  

> .,

## the  w. .

# -. - - . . 

## and to  hurdble  the . - - - .-' 

## padishah  of Moscow; but, if  'a Turkish  tradition 

## .*

## is  .to.  be credited, the Ottoman empire is to be  

> E ' . a

# *- .overthrown  by  a northern power.  br'e  these  two 02  . . .. 

## rd,  or  heither.? . . . . -10  PREPACE. 

## Unfortunately the  Cirmssiansdiffer  with  regard to the form of their  political  government.  TT'hilst 

## those of the west have always had a chief, under the  banners  of  whom  they march against the Russians, the  Circassians  of the east  have  pre-ferred a democratic government. The latter are under the impression that Russia cannot bribe several leaders watching one another closely. But events, as it will be  seen,  show that their notions are erroneous. 

# . .

## I n fact,  Shamyl  is as inaccessible to corrup-tion as  Khasi-Moullah.  Moreover, the  numbcr  of his followers is perpetually increasing, as they confide in his wisdom and valour. The populations of the Black Sea, on the con-trary, being deprived of a general leader to direct the various movements, take  a d s  unseasonably, and without unity of purpose.  

> - ,
> ,

## Alre?dY their.beys  fraternise  with the  Bussian I .

## .chiefs, and their  ouzdines  with the officers.  

> :. '

## The  ~ircassiak of the  bast  visit the Russian 

## 'forts,  to effect there,  peaceauy,  the exchange  ok 

## their productions; and as the  promisep  held  

> c.
> PREFACE. 11

## to them that an English fleet was destined to deliver them have proved to be deceptive, the intercourse between the  two  contending parties has, on that account, become yet more frequent. Moreover, as the beys, Dshighetes and Oubiches, are  favourably  treated by the Russian generals, among whom we shall mention  Mouraief  and Ivan Bey, who is himself a  Dshighete  by birth, 

# &  

> .-'

## they naturally feel more and more well-disposed 

## 1". towards Russia. No one can doubt that the Russians  mill  ably take advantage of the favour-

- able dispositions of their  neighbours  of the i r

# $ Black Sea.  

> r .
> i-. .

## The Russians are - - carried onward. Will they stop on the road to conquest? The  taking 8'  +

t - of  Trebisond  presents indeed more  diiliculty 

# g.  =

## C by land than by sea, as the  &ad  which leads 

# ;frbm  ~ r s e r o u m to that city is rendered toilsome  

> .<

# ** 

## ?and.  dangerous  bv  several defiles that are to be 

# he  Pachalik  of Kars would even prove to be  

> 4CI.

## b o r e  useful acquisition for them. The climate 

## '?that  territory is decidedly more favourable to ..

## -Russian - garrison  than  that of Georgia, 12- PREFACE. 

## On the side of Persia, Russia has not, as it is' pretended, more land than she requires; since, a t this very moment, the Czar is willing t o accept aprovince for the arrears of the contributions that 

## are due t o  him.  T H E C A U C A S U S . 

# CHAPTER I. POLITICAL CONSIDERATIONB. 

England  with regard to the Caucasus-Refutation of Erroneous  Arguments2 

Plundering  habits  of the Circaesians-The East Indies-Misdeeds of the Russian domination  -The  Aleoutes  -The  Birguises- Slavery in the 

~ ~ u c a m s - h e  Selling of Women -Turkish Harems. 

AN enemy to war,  _and  a friend to the independence of 

## . every nation, I have blamed,* and I still disapprove, the 

Capcasus;  but I must state that the arguments which in England are brought forward against it, have no 

e-estimation  of those who are conversant with 

on,  and who have impartially examined it under its different aspects.  A p ,

e taking  of the Vixen, in 1837, the most strange have  cir@ated  concerning  that  waq  nod  haveL 

d the ideas of the public.  - . .

"Turkey," it is said, "had no right to yield to Russia 

# east  of  the  Black  S& as  she  did by her  treaty 

The had over the  C i r c d a n s  no  other 

that of a head of the  Mussulman  church, and not dispose of a province which did not belong to 

Russia, under Nicholas I.,  chaptor  on the Caucasus. 14 THE CAUCASUS. POLITICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 15 

But the Turks had garrisons at Anapa,  Suhum.Kale, 

and though not the suzerains of  Circassia,  yet they mere its protectors. They therefore had a right to abandon the 

sea-shore  to Russia, since they had exercised, in the inte-rior of the country, a power more or less extended according to circumstances. By anterior treaties, and already' in the time of Catherine II., both powers had made different stipulations concerning the fate of the different parts of  Circassia,  of  Kabardah  and other provinces. The Persians, who, on their side, occupied that part of the Caucasus which joins the Caspian Sea, have also, at different times, disposed, in favour of Russia, of that region, the possession of which was more or less ques-tionable. By the treaty of  Gulistan,  concluded in 1813, under the mediation of England, the Shah gave up all his pretensions on  Daghestan  and other parts of the Caucasus.  >

The war which the Russians carry on against the  Circas-

sians  is neither more nor less just than that of the French against  the.Arabs,  and that of the  English  against the Caffres. 

Are  they wrong in calling the  Circassivls  plungerers? 

The plundering habits of the mountaineers cannot be questioned. From time immemorial those tribes have lived through the  plundering  carried  on i n the  territory 

of their  neighbours.  They make them a sort of store-house, and also a constant mean of  subuistence. 

Moreover, when the harvest does not afford them  sufE-

cient  means, the  Circassians  seize  upon  children,  and  d l ' 

them  for slaves. Their incursions on the Russian  ter&rY, 

for ever renewed, have  always  been attended with unbear-able excess. They carry away with them not only the cattle, but also the inhabitants, mhom they make their 

slaves,  mithout  distinction of  sex  or age, and  mhom  they restore for a ransom,  mhichis  one of the  principal  objects of  theu  expeditions. I t is not unusual  vith  them to drag into the mountains the wives of the Cossacks, of Russian merchants, or of military men, and  to  ravage  whole 

stanitzas  (Cossaclts'  hamlets). The  Tcherkesses  resort, indeed, to harsh measures to-wards their Russian prisoners, and far from behaviog well towards them, they  in~ariably load them  with  chains, and make them  work  in the fields, like beasts of burden. Would a better treatment obtain better results ?. The Russians are naturally led to retaliate; and in the attempt to  put  an end to those nefarious acts against pro-perty and personal liberty, war has become  permanent.  

> -

The English fear, justly, that the Russian war in the Caucasus may one day threaten their possessions in the East  Indies.  . The Russians have already  steam-koats  on 

'&he  lake  Achal;  and  their disastrous expeditions against 

# $-.  ' Chiia  and  Bukhara  will be no more renewed. Just now  

> t y

- .*t&  General  Pezowsky  has  $vacuated  a Chivan  fortress, and 

# $; .the Khan of Chowa has declared a wish to maintain the best relations with the Czar.

, ' 

> ,

Persia is little more than a Russian province ; and one 

> 6,

# % &mot  help smiling on hearing  Klaproth  say that the 

# gj%t .Ri&ians  could,  at the utmost, only  threatm  IIindostm;  

> L

but'Lahore,  the Peru of  precious  stones, is a rich and easy  

> '

and the Sikhs, trained to war by the French, 

%odd  become invincible, were they supported by the 

:Bnasian$ 

gg:  .

?r:-J:.'-*:A Russiar;  army, declaring that its wish is not to subdue 1 *

%be Indies,  but  to'deliver  them from English domination, 7 -

&would  probably see as many as 200,000 natives come and 

> b*<

;flock  under  its  standards, led by their different-nabobs. 16 THE CAUCASUS, 

Tartary,  that nursery of invaders, which extends from the Caspian Sea to China, and which overflows  mith  inhabi-tants, might, if aroused by Russia, in a year of scarce pasturage, throw masses of warriors into India.  HOW 

could the Bengal army resist such an invasion  1

The English do not relish the notion of one day having  t6e  Russians for their  neighbours.  But is it in their power to prevent it ?

The  world  will, no doubt, for a certain length of time, 

coutinue  to be an object of contention between absolutism and liberty, whose struggles are  ;lone  worthy of being recorded by history. But how  can  liberty expect to achieve a final triumph, if it recoils from a contact  mith  its adver-sary ? The English, it is true, are not sufficiently numerous i n the  East  Indies  ; but they are sufficiently rich to main-tain efficient armies there. Let the English resolutely declare themselves the generous defenders of liberty, and their moral  influence  will overwhelm the brutal force  of 

the Russian empire. Mr. Urquhart* considers the Caucasus the shortest road to India; but I do not consider it the most convenient. Besides, there is no reason why the Indian  mail  should not pass through  Poti  and  Tiflis. 

Now, it is but justice to Russia, to state that she -

has rendered  roadk  safe which were infested  by  robb%rs, 

uotwithstanding  the contributions  which  the chiefs  of 

different tribes raised upon travellers. I could not help smiling, while perusing a  ferc  pages  of 

Spmcer,t  in which the author dwells, with  aelight,  on,the 

prductions  of the Caucasus, and speaks with a certain 

# * The Mystery of the Danube. ,

t Travels in the Western Caucasus,  vd.  I. 

Tcherkesses  ; but who, through party-spirit, have, as  much  

> $9

they  could,  interpreted, in favour of the  Circassians, 

what they have seen and heard, and have prudently omitted many things unfavourable to them.*         

> ..A-,
> Dm Kaukasus, vd. II., p. 49, first edition.
> C
> POLITICAL CONSIDERATIONS.

17 

longing of the spacious ports; of the seas abounding with fish ; and of the safe anchorage on the  Euxine  Sea. It is easy to perceive that Mr. Spencer would, with satisfaction, like to see that country come into the possession of his countrymen. Such a feeling may be  praiseworthy;  but the  Circassians 

mistrust the English,  who,  they fancy, are attracted by their gold, and whom they would not like to see settled in their territory. But is, after all,  English  domination, in the East  Indies, 

so much to be admired ? Has torture entirely disappeared  ?

What efficient means have been resorted to, in order to elevate the moral and physical qualities of the Indian  P

Widows, it is true, are no longer allowed to burn themselves alive with the corpses of their husbands. The Thugs, a

detestable sect of assassins, are put down everywhere, and roads have been opened. Yet the natives have many in-ducements which lead them to prefer the government of their own princes to that of England.  

> -

I n  order that our appreciation of  EngFish  writers may not be ascribed to Russian patriotism, which we have relin-quished in favour of English freedom, considered as distinct from British domination in foreign countries, we  shall 

bring forward, on a point which we have not yet touched, the authority of the German traveller,  Moritz  Wagner. 

# :'' " ~ r k a t mistrust," he says,  "is to be entertained while 

perusing  the works of the English writers, who, such  as 

Bell and-Urquhart, have, it is true,  personal'ty  known the 18 T H E CAUCASUS. Corruption is  no  doubt an arm which Russia handles mith  uncomnon  skill, and especially through it she has smoothed her way to the  Caucasus.  Russian brandy has, in spite of the Coran and  Shamyl,  carried havoc amongst the Lesghis. Russian coin is much sought after by all the different tribes, and especially the  silver  roubles,  which  have 

replaced the  h e n ,  the  cattle,  and  the salt, which formerly served as means of exchange. The epaulettes also have excited the ambition of several  Circassian  princes and nobles. The seductions of  civilisation  penetrate to places which had 

been  inaccessible to Russian bayonets. Nevertheless, hatred to the Russians is  powerful  every-where; and religious fanaticism is powerfully fanned by the sect of the  Murides. 

W e must add  also  that Russian agents discredit by their dishonesty the influence of their government, and they do so, even in spite of the numerous persons dismissed from the service by prince  Vorontzof,  who,  it must be admitted, is one of the most distinguished men of Russia. Now, if we are anxious to ascertain what kind of happi-ness the  Circassians  have to expect under the Russian yoke, let us examine the condition of the populations which enjoy the benefit of Russian domination. Let us, take for instance, the Russo-American  Company, 

which is  place6  under the special protection of the emperor, and which is invested  mith  the monopoly of every kind of 

industry,  and with an independent administration. 

# .<,.. Well, that company, disregarding its true interest,  h a s 

9. - so well imitated the oppressive spirit of the government, that i t has reduced the  Meoutes  to the last stage of misery.  

> *

Forty years ago, the governor, Baronoff, in order to try rifles, used to place twelve  Aleoutes  by the side of one in Little Russia is a gift of the Russian govern-

- ment; and the privileges of the Polish provinces have been The present emperor has even carried his  jnge? 

nuity  so far as to introduce the censorship amongst the 

~osiacks, to curtail the national songs they have been ages, and purge new editions of liberal ich, nevertheless, will continue to live in the ose  children  of liberty. POLITICAL  COXSI  DXRATIONS.  19. 

another,  and order his soldiers to fire on them, in order to ascertain through  how  many heads a ball would go. Such a pastime is  now  out of fashion, because the 

Aleoutes  are too scarce. Indeed, their islands have been so brutally devastated, that the population of the island of  Kadialr,  which amounted  to  10,000, is now re-duced to 500. But is despotism intelligent because it is  all-powerful? 

## The natives have been compelled to follow the different Russian callings, and to abandon fishing for the chase ; so, being no longer allowed to procure fish for their food, they have gradually perished through starvation. But do they not derive a profit from the chase?  There  is penalty of death against any  Aleoute  who should sell a beast to astranger. All the beasts are to be taken by the Aleoute to the  magazin,  and  the  company pays twenty-five roubles for a castor, which is sold for 1,500 roubles at St. Petersburg. 

A merchant, who had just passed a considerable time among the Kirguises, and could not  sufficiently  praise their chivalrous spirit, and poetic kind of life, said to us lately--

# . "The Russian government has found the means of ,

exercising its spirit of mischievous cunning even against that new-made tribe. I t has taken it into its head to limit the extent of the territory within which the  Kirguises  are  

> ,

allowed to Gander; and yet, God knows, i t is rich in .20  THE CAUCASUS. Schools have been established in the Caucasus; but the 

Circassians  could do very well without being able to read the Russian language. Russia is half an ape and  half  a bear. She apes  &rope 

in foreign kingdoms, but at home her bear's  paw  is felt everywhere. 

# " The Russian Government," said another traveller, 

'<reigns like a bear in a forest, who breaks trees merely for the sake of breaking them." I n fact, it blindly crushes every germ of development. If you  mb  off the surface of the ape, you will find the bear underneath. Now,  with  regard to the  Circaasians,  we find that their 

eontact  with the Russians, far  h m  having a tendency to diminish slavery in the Caucasus, has given it an aspect 

still more repulsive. 

As we might be accused of exaggeration, we shall quote, on this subject,  the  words of a German  travelIer,  who was 

so  much  touched with  i+e  attention paid to him by the Russian authorities,  whi  had  given  him a government .

passport, and special escorts, that on his return to this-country, he increased the number of the  admirers  of Russia. M.  Koch  says :*  

> "

Circassian  princes and  nobIes  learned, through amore intimate acquaintance with Russian lords, that the lower classes in  Russia  were slaves. Being cunning, they 

immediately availed themselves of that knowledge,  a d  not only took  farmil,  possession of the soil, but  ilso  preteaded 

that they had a right of property in the common  Cir-iah 

who had settled on their domains. 

"At  the time when  theright  of property was settled  in'

Transcaucasia,  many of them, and chiefly  t h e  Georgians, 

who  then  were  in direct  connection  with the Russian govern- 

> &

Rew durchs  Russland  nach  dem  Kaukasschen  Isthmus, tom I. p.  3S2. 

ment,  knew how to derive great advantages from that cir-cumstance. I n fact, several who did not belong to princely families succeeded in appropriating that title to them-selves.  By  that means they became lords, over subjects who had held them, in some measure, under their dependence.  

> cr

Bondage,  &ich  formerly had never existed in the Caucasus, unfortunately now prevails there. Thus Russia may believe that she has enriched the princes of the land at the expense of the people, and has secured the devotion 

of  the former; but she has lost the sympathy of the common  population." 

# : This is positively true, as being particularly applied to Kabardah, which, nevertheless, enjoyed the protection 

I of Russian agents, of German origin. But we will add another fact, which gives but a poor opinion of the Russian goverment. I n 1826, the  German  colonistsaf  the  Transcaucasus, 

were carried  away  into slavery by the  Kurdes  ; and it was 

only  through  siibscriptions  in  Germany  and Switzerland, that they were ransomed. The government never thought of them, when it made peace with Persia. The Russian  Invaiid  (a periodical) of the 7th of August, 1840,  stigmatised  the slave-trade as  shameful  ; and said, 

that the Russian forts had been specially erected with a

view to oppose it;" this generous language was held 

Wder  the administration of General  Golovin. 

Well, five years after, Count  Vomntzof,  by an act made public in  1a5,re-established the slave trade. I t was through that shameful concession to  the  Circassians,  he 

.inaugurated his coming to the Caucasus. That measure found, of course,  supporters,  as every bad cause always did. 22  T H E CAUCASUS. P O L I T I C A L  CONSKDERATIONS.  23 According to those gentlemen, the slave-trade is indis-pensable to the existence of the mountaineers, and the daughters of the Caucasus are too  happy  to  dwell  i n the harems of Constantinople, as i n fact, the sisters and mothers of the  Sultans  are Circassian women; being brought up in the religion of  Mahomet,  their  fate  would 

not be different if they remained in their own country; besides, can they grieve for parents who  sold  them  ?" 

The supporters of the slave-trade are not, it must be ad-mitted, scrupulous about principles. But what would they answer if we told them that life in harems is not so happy as they are  pleased  to say? Have they not witnessed, in the market of Constantinople, young girls  crying  and deploring their fate, while  following  their buyers ? Does not the 

Bosphorus  receive women sewn alive in sacks, because their faithfulness is merely suspected, or because they are accused by more fortunate rivals  ?

Favourites  and eunuchs embitter the  l i e  of others; and the sultana herself is doomed to see her younger male children put to death, in order that they  shohld  not become 

pretenders  to the throne. The slave-trade was sanctioned by a treaty of 1847, between the Russians and the Circassians. During part of 

the  year it is carried on openly on the Black Sea. Every pear mare than 1,000 young girls are carried  fiom 

Circassia  to  Turkey;  and the obstacles opposed to that trade have had no other result than to quadruple. the price  of 

slaves. Even Austrian steam boats are employed for carry-ing  Circassian  girls; and whenever the Russians capture 

any of these slave-boats) they  either give the girls  inmarriage 

to the Cossacks, or they  allow  them to be violated by the soldiers of the regiments garrisoned  @ the  neighbouling 

forts. The slave-market of Constantinople, removed out of  the 

town, is nom of  diEcult  access to foreigners  ; but  the  Cir-

cassiaus  form  a separate colony, and enjoy many  prideges. 

We  will  borrow,  fiom  a recent work, a picturesque description of that slave-trade  *.  

> r

BayIe  St. John's  "The  Turks in  Europe."-L'Another  source from 

&ich  vacant harems are  filled  is the  market  of Georgian slaves  ; but it is 

by  no  means  so popular. These unhappy creatures, who are embarked at 

Trebisond  on board of the  regular  steamers, reach Constantinople in a vcry 

sad  and pitiable state.  TVe  can imagine an European reader almost  envying 

the  captain under whose  cure  is  placed  so poetical  a cargo  ; but, alas ! the 

truth  is, that the  Georgiuns  are looked upon almost as suspiciously as a hundred  cascs  of leeches for the  Marseilles  market. It is true they  are 

sepnrated  as  much  as possible from the rest of the passengers, penned in like a flock of sheep, hidden by dirty clothes  ; or, in bad weather, crammed below like  negroes  in the middle  passaga  I n spite of these precautions, the whole vessel suffers from  their  presence. Nearly every one  ofthem  has 

the itch; and, without exception, every one brings away a colony of  native 

vermin. This is easily accounted for. The poor things resemble not a  bevy 

of  EngIish  maidens going out voluntarily to seek for  husbma~ in  the 

barracks  pf  Madras or Calcutta. They are sold from poverty or avarice  by 

their parents or friends, and are handed over nearly naked to the purchaser. To  dress  them would eat up  all  the profits. A ragged shift and piece  of 

canvas wrapped round their shoulders-such is the costume in which  they 

crowd by day and huddle together at night, whispering or  dreaming  of  the 

splendour  which  has been promised them,  tr,  dispel  their sorrow or  their 

sulkiness,-and  perhaps giving a passing thought to the  home  whi& 

has cast them forth, Like the pet lamb when it has outgrown  the 

fondness or the patience of its mistress. The merchant, with  the  un-

caIculating  stupidity which  characterises  all  dealers  in  human flesh,  fattens 

these future  sultitnas  during the  voyage  on water and millet-flour  porridge. 

They arrive at their journey's end in such a state  that few  connoisseurs  in

incipient beauty would venture to pronounce  anopinion.  Sometimes,  wh, ,

the owner is in haste to  realise,  he  drives  his  Georgian%ods to market in  the 

msecmly  condition in which  they  come  ashore  ; or at most throws  around 

them a ferigeh-the  mantle  of the  Turkish  women. Chance for the  most 

part presides over the sale. The purchaser keeps at a respectful distance from his acquisition, as a doctor  might  from a plague patient  ; and  drives 

her  before  hi  to what may be called a preparatory school for the harem. A number of old women, indeed, gain their living by polishing up  this 

roughmaterial;  curing them, by remedies of whichthey have the secret,  of 

their  disease, combing their hair into shape, scrubbing them, and  exterminating 

the  reminiscences  they  have  brought with them from their native hovels!' T H E  CAUCASUS. TIIE PROPHETS. 25 

THE PROPHETS OF THE CAUCASUS.              

> dfanstw Bey-The Novel of Spencer-Lfansur's true Name-His attempts
> against &liar and Naour-His activity in the Western Caucasus-His
> End.-Basi Maullah

-His Exterior- His Education -The Siege of Tnrki-Colonel  Miklashewiski-Siegc  of Derband- The Russians seize upon several  Aouls  - Incursions of  Khasi  hfoullah  to  Kisliar  - 

> Tchoumkessen

# -The  Taking  of  Hemry  -Death of Khasi- Shamyl Bey-His Portrait - Hi Evasions - His Administration, and  Expcdi-  

> tion in Kabardah.

M B E R BEY. IF there be in literature a path beset  with  toil often  un-

rewarded, that path is, undoubtedly, the one followed by writers of historical novels; for readers, prejudiced before hand against the truth of the events that are narrated, do 

not know how to distinguish reality from fiction. So, unless an author is gifted with the genius of Walter Scott, with his extensive knowledge and his accuracy in the most minute descriptions, he will seldom obtain, in that path of literature, the success he expected ; yet a historical novel is well adapted to public  taste,  and, moreover, offers a prac-tical interest. History, by  offering  statements which are often in-complete, k not calculated to g r a t e entirely the curiosity of every class of readers. It, therefore, must be admitted that novel mhich supplies  historical  deficiency, develops characters, shows  the  secrct  springs through which men  are 

set in motion, and adorns facts, without presenting them under a contradictory light, is a work  of  unquestionable 

merit. Resides, history itself has often a romantic appearance. 

Tn  Eastern, or but very little  civiliscd  countries,  where 

written history does not exist, or if it does, is almost un-known, traditions are filled with fables, and it is difficult to separate tares from wheat, and gold from foreign ingredients. Moreover, a narrative is, in the  estimatiou  of many, so much the more attractive, as it is more marvellous. I n no country is that tendency of the human mind so visible as in the Caucasus, where oral relations are embellished, 

as they pass from mouth to mouth; and so much so that they bewilder any one who would attempt to discern reality from fiction. 

El&  Mansur  is, above all, one of those men, about whom the most extraordinary reports are  circulated.  To collect and group them artistically was an undertaking which 

could  not fail t o please the fancy of an author. I t is what Mr. Spencer has done in his novel; entitled "The Prophet of the Caucasus and Prince Potemkin." But he has thought fit to place the scene in  Crimea.  However, 

taken all in all, his work deserved more success; for in it 

situations are interesting; events  fdl  of attraction ; and if we meet, here and there, unfair caricatures-as that of Souvoroff-the character of Girei, -Khan of  Crimea,  and that of the Prophet, are  skilfolly  traced out. Nevertheless, the author might  have  drawn more advan-tage than he has done, from the supposition that  Mansur 

Bey  was  the'son of a king of Poland.  

> *

Taking  histiry  for our guide, we  h o w  that the name of 

> D

26  TB  E CAUCASUS. Sheik Mansur mas at first Dervish Mohammed, and that 

Daghestan  was his  primitivc  field of action.  It'  was at the 

head  of an army of  Lesghians  and Tchetchenians that  hc 

attacked  Kisliar,  where he experienced a complete check ;

he mas not more successful at  Navur,  where Cossack women fought by the side of their husbands. Mansur Bey was the first who seriously set to  work 

for the purpose of bringing together the different  tribcs  of 

Font-Euxine,  in order that the  Ru3sians  might be more 

sucessfully  resisted. His preaching of the Koran mas at-tended with so  much  success that he converted the  Ubikhian 

and Daghestan princes and nobles,  who,  since that time, have professed the  Mussulman  religion. He was, in  1'191,  taken prisoner by the Russians, at the assault of Anapa. He mas conducted to the convent of 

Solovetzki,  on the shore of the  BIack  Sea, where he soon ended his days in captivity and grief. Mansur Bey was a frugal and learned man; qualities which, no doubt, added to the prestige of his name, which still lives in the memory of the mountaineers. He has had several imitators and successors  in  his holy mission; but neither  Guz-bq  nor  Dschimbulat  rose to the high reputation which he had obtained ; and we therefore do not think it fit to enter into any details concerning the deeds of these last two personages.  

> -

Khasi-Moullah  was a man of a short stature, with small eyes and a  thin  beard ; and the small pox had left traces on his countenance. He was brought up by the  Moullah 

of the Aoul  Berekei,  in Koissouboula. That chief having    

> THE PROPHETS. 27

discoxred  in  thc  young  man  an uncommon capacity,  sent 

him to  Kadi-Mohamed,  in  thc  domains of  Aslan-Khan  :

but, in 1821, that  Khan  espclled  from his country both the master and the pupil ; thereupon Khasi became  a

travelling  clerk-an  - occupation which gave him an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the nature of the 

county  which he was later destined to make  resoundmitli 

the report of his exploits, Not long after, in 1830, he was seen surrounded with boor  Murids,  whom he had trained. With that small band he openly declared war against the Russians.  Naurous 

Bey, who mas detained prisoner at  Derband,  found out the means of escaping from that town, and went to join him as a partisan.  Khasi-Moullah,  different from other chiefs, did not himself make use of arms ; and he did not fight, but excited the believers to fight bravely. 

At that period  Paskiewitch  had just departed to wage war against the Poles, and had been,  ad.interim, 

succ&ded  by General Parkratief; thereupon the Prophet presented himself, with an army of  Lesghians  and 

Tchetchenians,  before Tarki. The fortress of that town, called Bournaia-that is, the stormy-was commanded by Major  Pedassyseff,  and had only a weak garrison. If 

Khasi-Modah  had attacked it on the side of the mountains, he, undoubtedly, would have taken i t :  - b u t  he confined himself to besiege the town, which extends more towards the east. H e had two important results in view  ; the first  

> was,

to take possession of the springs, which alone supplied the town with water, and to  scize  upon the powder 

niagazine,  which was in  the  neighbourhood.  

> .

He fully succeeded in his undertaking; but, at  t h 

moment the mountaineers  cntered  the  magazine, a  grenade, 25  TI1E  CAUCASUS. THE  PBOPRETS.  20 

thrown in it from the fort, caused it to cxplodc,  and  agreat  number  of  Circassians  mcre  lrillcd  by the  explosion. 

I n the meanwhile the garrison made frequent  and  terrible 

sallies  ; but it suffered  dreadfully  from thirst, and  appeared 

to have no other resource left but to bury itself under  thc 

ruins of the fort. I n that emergency, a Tartar promised to carry, to General Kochanoff, the news of the distress  of 

Tarki. He leaped down from the  wall  : the Russians fired at him, and he, in his turn, fired at them ; through that stratagem he was considered a deserter, and allowed  to 

proceed  onhis  journey.  A few  days afterwards, General Kochanoff received, in the barrel of a gun, a note, stating the desperate position of  Bouinvia.  He flew to its assistance ; and the joy of the  ganison  was great indeed, when it heard the roaring of the  Russian  cannon.  Thc 

fight mas terrible, and lasted for twa days; but, on the 30th of May, Khasi-Moullah raised the siege. He went to excite  Tabasseran  to revolt. Colonel Mikhlachewski was 

charged to put him down. He succeeded in a  brilliant 

campaign which lasted only a fortnight, and in which he acquired the denomination of the Black Colonel,-a de-nomination which the mountaineers gave him out of the terror with which he inspired them. At the same time they changed Khasi-Moullah into  Tmi-Moullah,  that is, dog, to express the sufferings he drew upon them. Nevertheless, on the 19th of  Au,pt,  Khasi-Modah 

dared to lay the siege before  Derband,-a  powerful 

town  in which he had some accomplices. But Major 

WasseE~ofi the commander of the fort, which  w q  called 

Narynkale,  knew so well how to revive the courage of the inhabitants, that the  Tartar%  came to ask him for arms, and, in  fact,  assisted the  Itussians  in their different sallies. 

Therc  then ensued  a dreadful fight, in which  thc  Russians, though inferior in number, remained victorious. All the stratagems of Khasi-Moullah had  now  rather the effect of lowering him in the estimation of the population : finally, on the 27th of August, having heard of the approach of General  KochanotT,  he raised the siege  and  fled to the mountains. The Russians, to be revenged of those two sieges,  tdok 

the  aouls  Duweck,  Madschalis,  Erpeli,  and Tcherkey, from which they carried off immense booty ; for the  Lesghians 

had concealed there their riches,  beIieving  they  wodd  be safe. Moreover, at the taking of  Hermentchous,  another 

populous  aoul, the  Moullah- Ahdurachrnan,  one of Khasi-

Modah's  captains, was burned alive in a tower, with about fifty Murids. Nevertheless, all those checks did not prevent Khasi-

M o d a h  from falling unexpectedly, the  1st  of November, on  the  town of  KisLiar,  and in broad day. He carried off considerable booty,  especiaIIy  by levying a tax on  thc 

Armenian merchants. On the 2nd of December, the Russians attacked the aoul 

Tchoum  Kesun,  Colonel  Mikhlachewski  was  killed  in that attack; but, before expiring, he said to his soldiers, 

"take it;  " and the soldiers took possession of the  aoul,  and put the inhabitants to the edge of the sword. 

On  the 17th of October, 1832, General  Rosen,  having crossed the defile of  Hemy,  though the  momtaheers  pre-tended that it was insuperable  unless  it rained, attacked the  aoul  of the same name. The volunteers of the regiment - 4of Sappers  caaied  the last tower at the point of the bayonet, and threw down, among other corpses, that of Khasi-

MoulIah.  IIc  received death  while  holding his beard with 

his  left hand, and raising  his  right fist to  hcavcn.  I30 THE CAUCASUS. T H E PROPHETS. 3 1

Shamyl is now 56 years old; hc is fair, with grey eyes, and a  regular  nose. H e is a middle-sized man, and his constitution is rather delicate, though 'he has, from his youth, endeavoured to  strengtheu  it by exercise. As well 

as%is  actual antagonist, Prince Vorontzof, he suffers from pain in his eyes : his hands,  his  feet, and his mouth are small, and the  colour  of his skin is more white than that of his countrymen. But now his beard is grey. 

Shamyl  is a  Lesghian  by birth, and he mas born i n 1797, 

in the  aoul  of Hemry. His knowledge of the tongue, of the literature and of the philosophy of the Arabs, is very extensive. He is indebted for his superior learning to 

Monllah  DsheEaLeddin,  whom he has always treated with 

great  veneration, and who contributed much to raise him to power. Ambition, dissimulation, and the calm which fits the 

prophet  as well as the chief, are the distinctive features of his character. He  considen  himself as the arm of Providence; and the 

Murides  believe that he is inspired. The  wonderful  luck with which he has three times escaped a death  which  was 

deemed unavoidable, has confirmed the faith of the people in him, and keeps up his own energy. The  first  time that he miraculously escaped death was, in 

1831, at the storming of Hemry.  Khasi-Moullah  and many  Murids  were  killed  by his side; he' was himself wounded with a ball and a thrust  of the  bayonet  : yet  hc 

opencd  a way, disappeared ; and two years afterwards the Caucasus  resounded  with his name. I t has  bccn  for a long  timc  prctcnded  that hc had bceu 

taken  prisoner at  Hcmry,  conduetcd  to  Petersburg,  made  a

~ u s s i a n officer, and  sent  to  fight against his own  country-

men ; but that, having been  offended  by his  chief,  he  hacl 

passed over to the enemies of  Ihssia.  It is even  related 

that  afterwards  a mounded Russian  officer,  who had  been 

taken prisoner,  w L  brought to him, and happened to be  a

friend of his; and that, after a long conversation,  Sharnyl 

had restored him to liberty.  Thc  pretended conversation has, of course, been reported with all the  details  which could make it appear interesting. 

There  is,  however,  one part which is positively certain :it is the education of his two sons at  Petersburg,  in a corps of Cadets. But one of them escaped and rejoined his father. Nevertheless the history, which w e have just mentioned, is true, but with this difference, that the hero of i t was 

Daniel-Bey, now the friend of Shamyl, and his companion i n arms. 

- Daniel-Bey was, in fact,  made  a Russian general ; and, unwilling to submit to the injustice of one of his chiefs, he deserted, and from  Teflis  he went to  Sclissia,  his native country,  of  which he was sultan, and where he erected  the 

standard of revolt. Thereupon Colonel  Belgrad  marched against him, and took Sclissia by assault. Daniel escaped, and went to join Shamyl, who appointed him his brigade major. But let us return to  Shamyl. 

As  i t may be  easily  believed, the preservation of Sha-

myl's  life has also supplied the mountaineers with subjects 

Tor  miraculous narratives. According to one of those .

wonderful stories, Shamyl was killed at the storming of Hemry; but Allah gave him a new life, in order that the resurrection of the  Murid  should show by a visible sign 32  T U E  CAUCASUS. T H E PROPHETS.  33 

that he  mas  destined to be the  chicf  of his  co-reli-

g-ionists. 

It mas in 1834 that  Sharnyl's  life was, for the second time, miraculously preserved. The event occurred  at 

Chunsakh,  under  the following circumstances :-

Chunsalrh  was the residence of the khans of  Avaria; 

and the  khaness,*  Pachou Bike, faithful  to the Russians, had, in  1530,  repulsed  Khasi-Moullah.  But afterwards, 

Hamsad  Bey, the successor of that prophet, took possession of Chunsakh, but only after he had  srst  traitorously assas-sinated the two sons of the khaness,  who  had  come to his tent for a parley, and next put their  m o t h  to death. Avengers are not wanting in the land of  Daghestan; 

and the new chief of the  Murids  was to perish through  thc 

hands of his  two  faithful  and distinguished companions in  

> arms,

Ossnaan  and Hadshi Mourad. These two brothers had been brought up with  Omar 

Khan, the eldest son of the  Khaness  of Chunsakh.  IE-

cited to vengeance by their  own  father, they killed  Hamsad 

B q in the mosque.  Ossman  himself perished under the blows of the  Murids  ; but his brother roused the people to insurrection. A great number of  Murids  were slaughtered in the temple ; and those who escaped took refuge in the tower. Shamyl,  who  had followed  Hamsad  Bey to the 

mosque, was among them. They offered a desperate re-

sistance. Thereupon Hadshi Mourad ordered the tower to be set on fire.  Only  two  Murids  escaped  t h o u g h  the flames: one mas the  denunciator  of the plot, who had sworn on the Koran to keep it secret, and had  betrayed& 

Kadshi  Mourad. He was taken and burned alive.  The 

other was  Shamyl  himself, who vanished out of  sight. 

# * Ehanees  the feminine of khan. 

The third escape of Shamyl mas not less extraordinary. I t  O C C W ~ ~ in 1839, at the storming of Akhoulgo, where he commanded the garrison.  Fifteen  hundred  Murids 

were killed while fighting, and the others, to the number of nine hundred,  all  more or less mounded, mere taken prisoners by the Russians. But when the battle mas over, Shamyl, who had directed the defence of that castle-redoubt, was found neither among the dead nor among the prisoners. And no one could conceive by what 

means  he could have accomplished his escape. Shamyl  himself  never revealed the mystery of his  dis-

appewance  from Akhoulgo, being anxious to increase the prestige attached to his name, and to  make  the people believe that a miracle was always ready at hand to  preserve 

his fife and liberty. But the Russians,  who  had no  inteiest 

i n believing that Shamyl had been saved by Divine inter-vention, pretended that he had concealed himself in some subterranean passage, and  had  remained there till he found an opportunity of effecting his escape safely. However, be it as it may, he passed into the country of the Itchkenians, and aroused the  aouls  to insurrection one after the other. That extraordinary occurrence shows fully the wonderful power of Shamyl's moral influence; for, while the taking of Akhoulgo  kepi  the  neighbouring 

populations in  terror,  those  who  were in the rear of the Russians revolted; and ancient servants of Russia sent  "-ij

back  theiraussian  insignia of distinction, in order to side .-* - 3openly with the Iman ! Yet the  General  Grabbe  understood  4

so little the importance of that man, that he offered only one  hundred  ducats for his head.  rq ' . Y$

Shamyl,  though an  Iman,  and the second prophet of  3

Allah,  as he is  calIed  by his followers, does not consider  '

> % _ .
> E

34  THE CAUCASUS. himself bound to keep faith  with  the Russians,  " whose 

cyes  express falsehood, and lips tell lies." I n this he fol-lows the prescription of his master and predecessor,  Khasi-

Moullah.  He, in 1837, took a solemn oath of faithfulness to the Emperor of Russia, and the oath was received at 

Tititle  by General  Zass.  But he  sam  in his oath nothing else but a means through which he could get out of his temporary difficulties, and pave the may to greater advantages. Shamyl  had  for a long time a  potent  rival to his  pomer 

in the person of  Tashaw-Hadshi,  who, conscious that he 

codd  not effectually struggle against his  influence,  ac-knowledged his supremacy in 1837. Religion, union, arid violence, are the three springs of Shamyl's power. He has known  how  to establish unity in religion, to reconcile  ALi  with  Omar,  t o mingle all sects into a single one, and through faith to keep the different populations united in their common hatred of the "Moscovs." But fear has more share than interest in maintaining the various aouls under his domination; for he chastises traitors and subdues rebels. W e should be wrong indeed if we believed that the populations which obey him are pleased with  bis  sway. I n fact, he raises regular and irregular contributions in coin, in men  aud 

in provisions,  which  are considered as vexatives. Every tenth man is obliged to rally around his standard, 

## and the others to keep themselves ready to  obEy  the first 

order, or to encounter the first danger. Every family pays a tax of a silver rouble  ; and the tenth of the harvest is taken to the storehouses of  the  chief. Discontent is so great, that Shamyl dares not to appear in public unless surrounded by a numerous escort. T H E PHOPKETS.  33 

Hamsad  Bey was the first who formed a troop  of 

Russian and Polish deserters, among whom there were several officers. Shamyl has improved and increased that troop, which is now composed of 4,000 men of all nations ;

but his life-guard is formed of 1,000 picked Murids, called 

Murtosipts. 

Shamyl drams the best advantage he can from the credulity of the mountaineers. Every time that an im-portant expedition is to be undertaken, he retires into a

grotto, where he remains whole weeks fasting and con-versing with Allah; and on leaving his retreat he publicly announces the result of his conversations with God. H e has introduced post-houses and couriers on horse-back through a11 Daghestan. He has also imitated the Russians, by instituting decorations, distinctions, and ranks in his army.  The  chiefs of 100 men, who distinguish themselves by their courage, receive silver round medals ;

the chiefs of 300, triangular medals; and those of 500, silver epaulets. Before 1842, sabres of honour were the only distinction bestowed, and they were carried on the right side. Now, the chiefs of 1,000 men have the rank of captain, and those of a larger number are generals. Cowards are marked with a piece of  feIt  fixed on the  arm,  or on the back. The  mo'st  distinguished companions in arms of Shamyl are  Akhwerdu-Mahommed,  Shwail-Moullah,  and  Ulubey-

Moullah. 

Shamyl is eloquent, and is in the highest degree master of that oriental eloquence calculated to fire  with  enthu-siasm  MussuIman  masses, to face the rhetorical  Aourishes, 36  THE  CAUCASUS. THE PROPHETS.  3 7

and to blunt the  hyper3oles  which  Russian  chiefs employ in their proclamations. Do the Russians say that they are  nukerous  like the grains of sand,  Shamyl  answers that the  Circassians  are the waves which will carry  away  that sand. I n his proclamation of 1844, to the armed men of the two Kabardas, h e said-

# " Do not  beEeve  that God favours number ! God  sides 

with  good men, and they are always  less  numerous than the wicked. Carry your eyes around you, and everywhere you will find the confirmation of what I am telling you. Are there not less roses than ill weeds? I s there not more mire than pearls, more vermin than useful beasts ? I s not gold more scarce than common metal ? And are we not nobler than gold and roses  ; than pearls and horses, and  

> a l l

the useful animals taken together ? for  a l l  the treasures of the earth are transient whilst we have been promised an eternal life. "But, if there are more  ill  weeds than roses, are me, instead of extirpating them, to wait until by their growing 

and  increasing they have stifled  noble  flowers? And if our enemies are more numerous than we are, is i t wise t o 

dIow  them to take us i n their nets ?

"Do not say: Our enemies have subdued Tcherkey, 

conqnered  Akhoulgo,  and taken dl Avaria! When the thunder strikes a tree, do other trees bend down their heads and fall  out  of fear of being struck in their turn  ?

"Oh ! you, little in your faith, follow the example given you by the green-wood ! Indeed the trees of the forest would have made you ashamed of yourselves, if they had a language and could speak. "Moreover, when a fruit  happens to be  p a w e d  by 

worms,  do other fruits rot out of fear of being eaten by worms  ?

# " Do not, therefore, be astonished at the infidels increas-ing so quick, and sending  dmays  fresh troops to the field of battle to replace those which we have destroyed.-For, I tell you : A thousand mushrooms and venomous plants grow  ont  of the earth before a single good tree has reached maturity. I am the root of the tree of liberty  ; my  Murids 

are the trunk, and you are the branches.  But  do not believe that the rottenness of one branch mill cause the decay of all the tree ! God  will  cut off bad branches and throw them into the fire of hell; for he is a good 

garnerer. 

"Come  back,  therefore, full of repentance, and enlist in the ranks of those who fight for our faith  ; anfi  you shall obtain my favour, and I mill be your protection.  

> "

But, if you continue to  believe  in the seductions of Christian dogs, and in flax-hair, more than in my exhorta-tions, then I will  acct>~r&h  what Ghasi Mohammed 

promised  you formerly.  My  huntGgs  shall  invade your 

aouls,  like the gloomy cloud of the storm, in order to obtain  though  force what you refuse to kindness. Blood 

will  m&k  my road; terror and devastation will follow me ;

for  what  the power of speech cannot accomplish, action must be at hand to perform." The  Kabardians,  fearing more the Russians than Shamyl, remained  immoveable  ; and when his lieutenant, 

Akhwerdu-Mahorna,  invaded their country with arms, he was killed by a tribe devoted to the Russians. Then 

ShamyI  kept his word, and leaving aside Russian forts, he carried devastation into Kabarda. More than  sixty  aouls 

became the prey of the flames; and the  M o d a h  took 38 TEE CAUCASUS. 

away with him a vast booty and a considerable number of prisoners. Shamyl has attempted to establish a bond of  connexion 

with the  Circassians  of the Black Sea; he has himself visited those warlike populations, and preached his doctrine among them. But he was unsuccessful  ; partly, because they speak a different language, and his eloquence had necessarily less effect upon them; and, especially, because they prefer to act independently, and as they are advised by their own interest. I n fact,  since  some time,  cornmer-

cia1  relations on the  Kouban  have acquired great extension; and those tribes have become fully aware that they would derive more profit from them, than from excursions in which their loss in men and horses would be superior to their gain in cattle and provisions taken away from the enemy. 

Nom  we have but little to add concerning  Shamy1:-

H e is sober, eats little, and indulges but a short sleep. His concubines are very few in number, and he has only three legitimate wives; and the one he loves best is an Armenian woman.       

> T H E COAST OF T H E CASPIAN SEA.

39 

# CHAPTER 

AN EQEESTRIAN  EXCORSIOX  BY THE SIDE  ,OF  THE     

> CASPIAX SEA.-FAREWELL TO THE CASPIAX.

I TROTTED swiftly along the coast, and  left  myself entirely to the will of my impetuous horse. The sparks fly, the dust follows me in clouds; the landscape  runs  with me; fly,  like  the mind.  How  sweet it is to fly with the rapidity of thought  ; how delightful to escape the measure of time and space ! There  is rapture in this swiftness,-poetry i n this rapid course, when light dazzles our eyes and respiration gets convulsive, like in the estatic moment of love. Velocity is a power : i t was a mechanical agency from all time, and has become a moral  power  with us. Velocity is a power, have I said, and how beautiful is it to know that  we  are powerful. Speed on, then, my horse, speed on! Thou 

evadest  my bit and my bridle, thou wilt overthrow me. Well, I shall find an animal more ferocious than thou to rule over thee, And I led the impetuous steed right against the breakers of the  C q i a n  Sea. Have you ever seen the lightning strike the waves ? One 

single second, and it vanishes  ; one single moment, and my horse stopped short before the waves, surprised by their roaring and howling. Like the savage horses of the Desert, 40 TEE CAUCASUS.  T E E  COdST  OY  THE CASPIAN SEA. 41 

the  mane  streaming in the wind, the waves  herd-like,  run,  have  lost  for ever! Is it you? I hat.e  affectionately 

bounded,  advanced, and retired  ; and  he, he rolled  his  fiery  longed  after  you, and  avaited  you a long time  since.  AU 

eyes,  black  like charcoal, with a distrustful wildness,  ex- has  disappeared. The mind alone whistles,  the  sea  aloue 

panded  his  smoking  nostrils, scented his strange companions, moves. 

and  whenever the water broke foaming against  his  brewt,  And  *at is  then remembrance but the wind  bvhich 

he  shook  indignantly the drops off his ears, struck the  blows  from  the  past,  and plays  with  the waves  of  our 

sand  with his hoof, and gnashing his teeth, he was  pre- inlugination  ? Happy  he  who,  be it only for a moment, 

paring  to bite his evanescent aggressor. I smoothed his  seizes,  as  if  by  flight,  these lively  recoIlections,  like  a swallow 

arcuated  neck and he became quiet, and  only  trembled  at  resuscitated out of the chains of  the  minter. 

times  at  the  contact of the waves which bounded  at  him- , This  oblivion was a feast for my heart;  it  was  a deli- 

> *

A stormy  northerly wind drove with  noiseful  vigour  the  rious  sensation encased in a gloomy  thought.  1 enjoyed 

waves on the sandy shore, as an eagle pursues a herd of  for  the  last  time the sight of the  Caspian-which  to-

swans.  The heavens were grey, the rays of the sun dis- ~ O r r o m I shall  leave for ever. Inhospitable,  lonely,  and 

persea  fan-like through the heaving clouds, and at times  - tristy  sea!  I t  is still with pain that I leave  thee.  Thou 

lighted  a rainbow of pearls above the masses of the waves.  hast  been the faithful companion  of  my  thoughts-the 

I bent  my  face to this welcome  rain,  and breathed with  unchanging  interpreter  of my sentiments. Bitter tears of 

expanded  chest the air of  my  native country, and it  appeared  mine  h e mixed with  thy  bitter waves;  and  often  hav& I

to  me  as if I heard amongst them harmonious sounds-the  - refreshed  a burning heart in thy boiling waters ; and  with 

of  my  parents,  from  whom I had been so long  thee  I escaped mankind as  wefi  as myself.  ' The  sound  of 

sepa~trated,-~f  friends, all but lost to me  ; the sound of the  thy  tempests stifled and silenced the storms of  my  mind  ;

nightingales  of  Volkhov,*  the sound of the lulls of the  the  human  voice humbled itself before that  more  maje$tic 

metropolis.  I t appeared to me as if the air was  impreg- voice  of  nature-always the same and eternally  changing  ;

nated  with the breath of my beloved one,-the freshness of  a language  well  known and still incomprehensible. Not  so, 

the  snow with the aroma of the flower of my minty  beloved  sea! a t times also I understood  thy-~peech. 

country; they breathed upon me the recollections of my My mind conversed with thee, as it were,  hi  a magnetic 

p u t h ,  and to the appeal of the heart answered  all the 

> I

trance. At thy appeal, awoke therein both an echo and a

favourite  dreams of the past; they flew towards me like response. Thou breathest t e me traditions of times of old; 

swallows,  shone like stars, and sprouted like  herbs  from the I penetrated thy sacerdotal mysteries  ; I pierced the won-

soil.  I t is you- ardent sensations, brilliant dreams, cheer- ' ders of thy abysses; and I could fluently read thy  d i ~ i n ' ~ 

ing moments of my innermost being, remnants divine of hieroglyphics, which thy ebbs trace on the-sand of  the 

the time  which  I had embraced for a moment, and which I ' shore, and 'thy breakers on the very breast of  the  roclr. 

*Flattering  and  v&  ocean ! The-same  ehigma  en&&      

> A river which flows at h'ovgoroa. F
> f

42 THE CAUCASUS. THE COAST OF THE CASPIAN SEA. 43 

thy shores. Thou openest, at times, thy bed, but it is  the 

doubt of a tomb-not the sense of a book. Alike  to 

hea-ven,  thou art closed to the eye of experience; like it, thon art not accessible to the ever  shifting  and often deceiving thought. And yet, man has,  mith  his armed eye, even penetrated to the milky way, and  deeply  ~ierced 

the crust of the earth; but what eye-what  soul-has 

reached the bottom of those  abysses  ? Who  could  lift thy watery covering? Poor man! thou art condemned to collect shells on the border of the ocean, and to waste uselessly thy wisdom in  analysing  bits of marine peat or grains of pearl. An immense, eternal Sphinx mill devour thee, as soon as thou  darest  to climb  ta  its summit, with-out comprehending its language- without unravelling its enigma. Everywhere-always, I have loved the sea.  ,'i 

loveits  calms, when its deeps, covered like by a mirror, are silent as if full of some divine thought;  %hen  the heavens -. 

reflect in i t and the stars seem to glide on its surface. Ilove the heaving of its respiration and the pulsation of its life in its young and eternal bosom, which renews and 

purifies everything. I love its  mists,  which it  sends'to  our 

thirsty earth. But, over all, I love passionately the storms 

and the hurricanes of the sea. I admire them by day, when the sun pierces with its rays the  black  clod,  and covers, as with a cataract of fire, the groups of waves run-ning over the watery desert-others hurry themselves t; enter in the circle of Aurora-they glow,  they  roar of fright, plunge with inclining heads in the abyss, to put out 

their  inflamed locks  ; others  rival  in their race the 

drilphins,  which combine with the form of a seal  the swift-ness of a swallow; others  cast  bundles of rainbows against the breast of the  i&epid  ship, which despises all elements -the earth whence it has started, the minds which it 

cleaves,  and the waters it tramples upon. I t enters into afierce contest with the  mou5tains  of waves-cuts them, breaks them, grinds them, so that it might well be said, that the giants of the water bounding against it with menace, tumble down with a smile and become crushed like the dust which descends from a wheel at full speed I admire the sea by night, when the pale moon raises its forehead from out the clouds like one dead rising from the grave, and strides  vdiceless  over the heavens, dragging after her on the sea her white shroud. These the  waves 

will raise  like  the shades of the heroes of Ossian, mailed in black, with locks of white hair on their shoulders, and the stars reflecting on their casques of steel. Furious they run-both batter, unite, tumble one over the other,  all 

lustrous by their  armour,  until they are crumbled to pieces by other warriors who follow them ! And those below-

far  off-the  giants of death, pace along-terrible ; a cloud serves them in lieu of a casque, and the sea, white as milk, foams under their feet; yet, one step, and the ship will meet destruction ! But Jove thunders-heaven and hell tremble in one sad echo-and, see ! the giant is  fallen, 

stricken by the flash of heaven. I Eke,  oh ! sea, thy merciless wrath  towkds  the rocky shores, which prevent thee  from  subduing earth. Then thou  twistest  and whistlest like a serpent, biting the heels of the rock. Thou  boundest  on them-thou  bitest  them 

Iike  a tiger, grumbling and  coloured  by passion. Like an 

artful  man, thou  glidest  under their feet; thou  filest,  thou sawest, thou gnawest the openings which time has  made  in their flames, and  strikest  ceaselessly with thy humid  flashes. 

Thou  wjiIest,  as  in  times  of old, to flood and  swallow  up 44  . . THE CAUCASUS. the earth, which thou  bast  conceived and since covered  

> -

more than once ! Come on,  new  Saturnus  ! thou shalt not devour thy child;  thou'hast  bestowed on him  but 

the body, and God has infused spirit therein -man. 

And is it to be his or her fate to fall a prey to the elements ?

Yes, I have seen many a sea, and have conceived affec- 

> -

tion for them  all  ; but the Caspian Sea is the most beloved of mine : thou wert my only friend in misfortune, and 

hast  preserved both my mind  and  body. Like the victim of a shipwreck, I have  been  cast by the  storm 

on the wild expanse of nature, and  lonely,  I have not known it. I have not awaited either the harvest of the field o r the prey of the forest; I have not dragged out of the sea 

either  its finny tribes or its precious treasures.  I did not seek thus either means of existence or earthly pleasures; I have asked from it but counsel for  h o w -

ing life, and to rule my passions ; I have not attempted to rule the elements, I wanted but to identify myself with them; and the'unioo of  the  heaft's  offspring of the earth, with the daughter of heaven, was one fraught with delight. Here  ambiti~n did not place a bar between me and nature, and the mob of men did not prevent me uniting with the universe. My mind reflected it faithfully, and I lost myself in delight in its incommensurable precincts-the limits between  myself  and her disappeared. The oblivion of myself resolved itself into a sweet and holy enjoyment, and my individual and public life vanished into a drop of  time  spilt i n the ocean of eternity. But, aside this, I have been attracted to thee by a con-formity' of thy destiny and mine. Thy waters are more T E E COAST OP THE CASPIAN SEA.  45 

shallow and bitter than those -of other seas.* Shut up in 

the  prison of sandy and  wild  shores, thou complainest lonely, and thy waters remain unmixed. Thou  knomest  neither ebb nor flood, and even in thy accesses of wrath thou  canst  not 

expand  thy storms beyond the limits assigned to thee by the finger of the Eternal. And who knows how thou  canst 

engulph  so many immense rivers which fall into thy deeps ?

Who can comprehend thy submarine volcanoes, those which vomit fire and those which  throw  out mud  Pi Who mill inform us how many  nations,  whose names are  lost, 

have passed over thy shores and over thy waves? how many nameless victims have been swallowed up in thy abysses? Thou revealest neither the traces of the one nor the blood of the other; a few fragments thrown on the beach alone prove the number of precious objects swal-lowed up in thy deeps.  _, 

I t is not the lapse of years, it is the storm which wrinkles thy brow; the tempests-those passions of the heavens. Then thou  becomest  terrible, troubled,  noiseful  ; but, as for contrast sake, sometimes  Blso  transparent and tranquil, thou  bathest  i n thy bosom lap the rays of the sun and the rights of man, and thou goest to slumber playing with the shells of the shore, like the child which stammers the  -

song of the cradle. Yes, Caspian, there exist in me more than one of thy  '

> il

.i, 

# * The  aurface  of the  Caapian  Sea  i e  three  hundred  feet below the level of  <              

> other parts of the ocean. The waters of the .ocean contain thirty to forty-%..
> five psrts of saline matter in one thousand.

The proportion in the Caspian . ?:

. $     

> sea is sixty to one thousand.

The Dead Sea has four  hundfed  and forty in  P 

> the thousand. 1

3

- -% . 

t The latter are to be found on  ncnrly  all the islands of  Bakou,  and the  $4       

> fountains of fire are not acarce in the Caspian Sea.

# 9ST       

> /+
> c"4 THE COAST OF THE CASPIAN SEA.

47 46 THE CAUCASUS. elements, and thou  hast  more than one of mine, except the 

d l and the knowledge. Thou  banst  not be otherwise than as thou art, and I could.  NOW I shall say  mith  Ryleieff :-

"I know the fate which awaits those who first rise against the oppressors of a nation." 

A , c r o m  of rays of light is majestic, a crown of oak is fine, a  c r o m  of flowers is pretty, but why should a  clown 

of thorns not be the like ?

Farewell, Caspia, once more farewell ! I wished to see thee, and I have seen  the;  without wishing it. I leave thee sorrowful, but I wish  not to see thee again, except if thou  wouldst  make me a  way.of  thy waters to return to my country. I cast a last look at  the  imposing picture of the stormy sea. The waves rolled in vast terraces  towards  the shore, shook their heads i n smoke and in drops, brake i n foam against the towers of wall which they had demolished,* and mounted on the sand, and  laidit  bare to a great extent. A

sort of misty rain,  which  the wind tore off their summits, hovered at the surface of the sea, and she, as a chameleon, in fine changed from green to blue, to white, and shone and vanished in a moment. 

~ h &with oppressed heart, I turned my horse, i t appeared to me that sea and wind combined their voice in asigh, and that the waves, like children, sprung up and asked me to take them on  my  saddle. I slackened my bridle, and my delighted horse, with one  jnmp,  put me on dry ground. 

# * There is no doubt that the old  wallsof  Derbent  reached far into the sea and were  .shut  up by a dyke with a door, which formed a  secure  harbour. Often, when  ~mirnming ana  plunging, I can  say  that  I touched the founda-tions of these ruins. 

When  I returned to  t o m  my cheeks were wet, but 

it  was  not with the waters of the sea.   

> FROU SHERVAN

TO  KGXAKENT,  SHAXdXHA. 

Down  from my horse ! I t is impossible to keep oneself on 

horseback  on this steep slope. I walk, and my ironed  Tieels 

glide  on the  rock,-my  breast heaves with effort; still, I

am  no novice. I twist the tail of the horse  round  my fist, 

and  the animal drags me to the top of the mountain. I

did  not object; this is a delicious way to perform picturesque journeys.  1 mould have gladly asked some of the dandies of St.  Petersburg  to dance a gallopade on these sharp rocks : before my face, the ironed hoofs of my horse; to the right, a rock which menaced to fall on my head  ; to the left, a precipice which reaches to the depths of the earth  ;

behind, a steep slope, uneven, slippery, made so by the cascades, under the command of the demons of the Caucasus  ;and if the hurricanes of this place do not disperse him i n perfume powder, -if the briars and bramble do not convert him into  papillottes  at half way, it is certain that he will have to speak of it the half of his life, and to repent it during  dl his life. But, alas, what magnificent sights at each turning,-at each step through these  rocks  I Reach here with a railway,  ilIumine  with gas the grottoes, the lair of the panther; build hotels, where now glitter the muskets of the  brigan&  of these mountains, and you  may 

be sure that English lords' and the naibs (nabobs) will not regret a thousand pounds sterling, for that which I enjoy at present at the rate of 5 kopecks  the  werst.*.               

> The tariff beyond the Caucasus is two kopecks for the wemt, ar
> well on the grand as on the h v e r a a l roada,

48 THE CAUCASUS. The forest becomes lighter, I leave it without sorrow  ; it 

has not yet assumed the general uniform of the  spring,-the 

green; it affords neither shelter against the rain, nor pro-tection against the rays of the sun. Some seared trunks of 

treeqrotten  from the  inc~emknt elements,foUow  me up to the limits of the growth of vegetation, and shake, as by the hand  ofwitches,  the long and gloomy festoons of ivy. They are replaced by tufts of bramble, mhich have sprung up from their fissures like families of gipsies and warm themselves at the sun ; see two caldrons which have taken each other by the hair, like our  moujiks  at the fair ; and by and bye there is nothing but a consumptive juniper tree, which shakes its head as if i t were in doubt to live the nest day, and gently drew mind. Moss  now  reddens along the ledges of the rock, looking like paint on the cheeks of an old woman.  This  is already the last strife  between  organic and inorganic nature ; further on, and nature slumbers a sleep without awakening-a sleep of stone, wrapped up in the shroud of eternal snow; further on, she utters but  signs  of exclamation, the winds of the hurricane and the  ecstacy  of a sentimental traveller. But, however disposed I might be to joke on every thing and every one, when I had reached the summit of the mountain which divides the province of Kouba from that of 

~hamakha, when I had looked around me, I became mute with enchantment, as if I had met, without expecting it,  her-

the soul of my  soul,  as if an angel had  brought  me the news of my pardon.  Here,  yes here, where there is more heaven than earth, men  ought  to throw away pencil and graver in disgust  ; forget their language,-paled,  poor  language. There is no force for expressing, no means for condensing the sentiments of astonishment which overflow the heart,-O N T H E COAST O F THE CASPIAN SEA.  4.9 

set the mind on fire, and  make  it spread in albeit isolated 

and  detached thought. Look to the East ! Do you perceive here below,  in  the deep between the blue of heaven and the distant glare, asheet of  living  silver  ? I t is the Caspian ! But  who.  will tell  where  are the limits between sea  andland,  where  water 

.ends  and earth commecces ? See  that harmony accessible t o the mind alone, which combines into one single harmony, one single outburst-heaven and earth. See this rainbow of the beautiful, rising up like a bridge  hetmeen  the universe and God. I admire unceasingly. It is splendid, it is so fine, that tears come involuntarily iuto my eyes. The sun is at a 

Ievel  with my head  ; like  a ship on fire he glides in the ocean of the air of rubies, he dashes forth rays  oflight,  and streams the gold of light and paints mith enamel the wavy mountain chains in the distance. Behind this appears, here and there, the yellowish green of fields, through  which  meander rivulets and sources, and  dl this tableau smiles to you from the dark shadows of the slopes of rock, burning, brilliant, life-ful, as the sleep of the youth, inaccessible and distant like the lost  garden  of Eden. 

The mountains divide before me ray-like and in circles, they  lift  themselves and strive to appear one before the other; the one, corroded by the rains of heaven; the other, pierced by crevices, here darkened by gloomy forests, there adorned by ribbons of  snom,  or in  manticiues,  which, like some Emir with a green turban, are seated in the shade of the tents of the Paradise of the universe. Meanwhile the clouds fly above the summits, like those herds of migrating birds, or they climb the heights of rocks 

lilic  a flock of mountain sheep, leaving tufts of wool on  thc 

> G

50 THE CAUCASUS. ON THE COAST  OF  THE CASPIAN SEA. 5 1

edges of the rock, sharp like thorns; or they repose like  a

caravan of camels, rich of  the  harvest of rains, at the entrance of the  Caravanserai.  See  here a cloud  which, 

opening its  wings  like a white eagle suspended  above  the precipice, will fall  d o m  and fill it up. Another has 

fdIen  and has  frozen  on the top of the  Shah-Day,  not now, but on the day of creation. A like cloud is  tq  my feet, but its  snow  is so clean, that it were a sin to impress on it the marks of my steps. I fear to breathe, for the sake  of  not defacing, by the breath, these heavens so pure, for not infecting, with the corrupted respiration of men, their subtile air  of  the mount. It seems, indeed, that no man has come here ever yet; all is so wild, so lonely and original ! I do  not perceive all around neither castles, nor town, or village, or habitation, nowhere any trace of furrow or the roads of man. On the rear of the rocks, I see here and there the black traces of lightning, and crevices opened by  superficial  springs; the streams alone converse around me, in running over stones, or dragging them along; or also, the forest sighs and the wind whistles. Neither the steps of a horse, nor the hoe of a villager are heard here,-here reigns nature and not men. But a day will come, when men will intrude on thy solitudes, and thou wilt intoxicate thyself of their sweat, as now thou  quellchest  thy thirst  whh  the heavenly dew ;

and they  will  inhabit thy caverns and thy mysterious 

defles;  they will cover thee with the dust of their life social, and with mud up to thy summits; they will pierce thy breast with mines and quarries  ; they will uncover thy entrails ; they will rip thee up, disfigure, and rase thee  ;

they will make thee work for their avidity; make thee the handmaid of their fancies  ; they will teach to the echo of these mountains their poor lays  ; they will force the tor-rent to grind their grain, and mill make creams of  thy 

virgin ice. N o doubt that man  will  gain by these changes, but the past  will  be the losers. R e will find no single, isolated spot where to hide his heart before the world; nowhere where he may breathe alone with nature, nor freely  outpour  the pains of the  sod.  Little man  will 

never drive the  jackal1  from its grotto den-deprive the eagle of his nest, and place therein the spotted eggs of the cuckoo. I n a  word,  the comfort  will  kill the majesty of thought as that of social life ! Thou wilt be more pretty, my  Caucasus;  but wilt thou be then handsome still? 

They  may embellish thee, but thou art better as thou art now. I feel myself so well and  Iight-SO  light indeed, that I

feel  as if  wings  were growing to me and  unfoIdin,  them-

selves; it appears to me, that I have but to knock my feet at this soil of the heavenly dwellings, to  be;  enrolled in heaven, to my home, to my sisters-the stars. Oh! nature has hidden a great, heavenly thought in the heart of mountains-those giants of stone, and has crowned 'them with pure and heavenly glory.  Befoie  i t we incline reverently our head, because it is dangerous to climb hither, and thence we easily divine our destiny. Below, on seeing that immense mass, one is scared with  astoniuh-

ment;  but here, on high, we are transported by admi-ration, which is the conscience of the beautiful-a proud and  fred  conscience-because it lowers itself before  Aim, 

who  is*  more than we. The  beautifd  is  the  Aurora of truth-and truth is a ray of the divine-which has broken off from the substance eternal, This, therefore, is the reason why this sentiment rises in the soul Iike a remem. 53  THE CAUCASUS- O N T H E COAST OF T H E CASPIAN SEA. 53 

brance  of the past! I t is  kno~yn to him-it is betrothed to him. I look  at the Caucasus, and it  secms  to me as if it were not for the first  time  that I am  here;  it seems  to 

me as if my cradle  had  been  rockcd  by the  waters  of the torrent below, and that the winds have  lulled  me to sleep; i t appears to me as if I had wandered  about  these moun-tains, picked in the times of my childhood, and that at that time I mas as old as the  world  of God. And  mho  mill say that I mas not contemporary to it ? DO 

the particles and elements of my body not  take  date from eternity, and did my soul not live before in  the  lap  of 

nature  ?

I descend towards the  Shirvan,  the land of the  sun-

the land richest  iu  grain of all the  lands  of the Caucasus. Before me is displayed an emerald sea of mountain chains, furrowed by the black and sheltered picks of the north; by the snowy mountains of the  Lezguistan,  the Kasikumouk and the  Bliss;  on the west, by the mountain wall of the 

Karabakh.  My  trusty horse glides on its tail, or jumps with great precision from one block to the others, which bar a narrow path along, and through which fall with great noise  tlie  rivulets  of melted snow. At times, on rounding a rock, my horse snorts, and shrinks back in terror, as he finds no support at all for his hoofs; and the abyss shines through the crevices, like the mouth of amonster of an enormous boa, whose respiration drags irresistibly its prey from the very depth of the forest,  and 

often even the mild swallow from off the height of the heavens. Throw  down  the bridle ; confide thy soul to God, and thy body to the steed, and do not turn thy eyes from the brim of the precipice, where the sun even  fears 

to  look,  else thy heart would follow the impulse. 

Tchapar-Khan,*  where is then  Shaytan.Kuprissi,-the 

dclril's  bridge,  mhich  they have been so much frightened with ? Had it, perhaps, like its builder, fled before the cunning and the daring of men  ?

## " We have passed it already, a long time since," answered the guide. I t is the same with all these frights; we expect them face to face, and they are already in our rear. Still, said the virtuous Tchapar, most happy that Ientered into conversation  mith  him, the devil has had, indeed, much trouble in this affair. Permit,  t l ~ a t I say, he first lived at the  c o r d  of Gaclishah of Persia, but as he could not design mith  his  tail the chiffera which the  mirras 

make on the  firmans,  and as his back could not bend in twenty-five different curvatures, as those of the courtiers, they have given him, poor  devil,  the bastinado  ou  his  heels, 

and driven him from the door of the  Sheyin  shah (king of kings). With broken nose and  luvated  tail he has  fled,  he has run to the  t0wn.t  I will, thought he, devote  myselfto 

commerce. The townspeople are stupid : I have seen how the herd of courtiers fleece them, and draw the ducats from their pocket by  oily  words. See-then, -he  sells  his horns to a cutler to  make  handles of knives of. The devil is quite gaie of the possession of his  ahasses,  and he does not think that they are of tin. The  tchavuches  assist him  mith 

his bad money, and as no one mill bail the devil: then comes  the  fe1akk.f  He  hardly creeps, he runs  without 

looking behind : he thinks, he meditates, he ransacks his 

## * Tchapar, a guide.                                          

> (-The oriental people use at every moment the pleonasma, g w , bakh, see, look; iclrliady, courtardy, he has done it,-has completed it.
> fBoard with two openings, in which the feet of the culprit are placed, the board is then lif~ed up, and the execution ia oifectcd with astick. O N THE COAST OF T H E C A S P I A N SEA.

5 5

54  T H E  CAUCASUS. intelligence and  his  wits. I will, says he, live with the country-people, they are simple and obscure-it will be easy to cheat them; every one, except the idle, can fleece them. See, he then meets a peasant.  Seliam  aleikum, 

aleihm  Seliarn  ! Where art thou going to, good man, along this road ? I t is fine weather,-it could not be finer for one who w i l l drown himself. Oh, thinks the devil, tbe pheasant flies himself towards the sportsman  ; his soul  shall 

not escape my talons, I must profit at  his  death of his 

tchouga  (coat) while he is yet  &\re. 

And what desire has thou to  drown  thyself? asked the devil. I haye  nothing to eat, at least I would  miah  to drink abundantly !

All  right, brother, and I shall get thee out of thy 

difficulty. 

Oh, then, I mill be thy slave for life ! Thou  shalt  be my khan, my  naster,  my father,  Vallah,  billah,  tallah. 

Here, my darling, this is what I shall do; let us buy grain and let us sow it in a  field,  this is  t h r  affair : only Ishall keep three-fourths of the  hamest  to myself, and give thee a fourth.  Dost  thou consent ?

Sparks  of joy shot from the eyes of the peasant, and his heart becomes sweet and soft like honey. I leave to thee, not only the three-fourths, but all that shall sprout above ground; I am satisfied with the roots. 

Words  mere as good as deeds  ; the bargain mas struck. The  devil  now pledges  hid  fur coat to a fakir,  for  two  

> tomans.

The devil  h y s  seeds of radishes, parsley, carrots, and of turnips, and soms a field not far  from  the three crosses. The devil does not deep at night, does not rest 

by  day, brings water, drives the finches  away,  and shakes in his skin; he expects  the  grain.  All  ripens,  all  is bronght home.  Tlle  peasant, as a conscientious man, returns to the devil all the herb,  and  keeps but the roots. The devil is mad of disappointment. The peasant is established and lives luxuriantly, and-the herbs are not even fit for the  market. 

Wait, said he to himself, this time they shall not get the better of me; at once I have become twice wiser. He meets again the peasant, and gives him some seed; only,  my 

friend, this time thou milt excuse me, this harvest take thou the stalks,  and  give me the roots. The peasant gave him a shake of the hand. Thou art right-me must balance our affairs. H e soms again; but he sows no more vegetables; he 

soms  corn. I t sprouts like emeralds-it ripens  like  gold; the peasant  waves  it with all his might,  and  laughs in his sleeves ; and the devil is more surprised than before ; the asses even do not eat such roots. He begins  zt  last to see clear, and although late, he puts his finger in the mouth. Cursed  manlets,  exclaims the demon, in wiping off his tears mith his tail  ; you  have  surlmsed  me i n everything, and you dare still to accuse me of everything,  and  put calumny and wrong on my back. Leave without me. Iam quite superfluous amongst  you.  IIe  plunged therefore under ground,  siuce  which we have neither seen or heard of him. The Fakir has made himself a fur coat of what remained to him of the skin of the devil, and the neigh-bours tell that he has resold it again to our Cadi. 

THE  LAST  RELAIE BEFORE  OLD  SHAMAXEHA. 

An infernal route-&vine  sights  !

I am paid mith usury for all trouble and difficulties. 5 6 THE CAUCASUS. Before sunset I hare  zrrived  in a little  t o m ,  whose name is vanished-the last  rnensilinn  before  Shamanlcha. 

Novhere  have I yet  forlnd  so poor huts and cabins  ; no 

tree  before the habitations; no garden around the village  ;

no doubt  tfiat  the inhabitants  leave,  during the heat  of 

summer, for the mountains. Moreover, it is not in  Asia 

like in  Europe,  the proximity of large cities does not enrich but impoverish the surrounding villages. If a cou-rier wants a horse, he takes it in the outside of the  to\?=, 

The beg or the nasir, if they require a fowl or  she~p, they are sought for in the village. If they take a fancy to make a pleasure party in  t5e  fresh air, they also go to the village. The lord of a district pays an  impost  as well to the  wrath  as to the joy of the chief of the province.  XO 

one dares to say-to-morrow I shall go in  anbe  to  fetch 

wood in the forest, or surely my daughter shall be his wife to-day. The peasant  had  nothing certain but strokes of the stick and imposts  ; in revenge the one and the other came to him without account and without a  will. 

Still, the  Circassims  long after the past.-"This," they say, 

"was  a golden time." Oh! men,  when  shall you live in peace and harmony with that which is? Here, the crevices become enlarged into a plain, on 

which  meanders a clear rivulet.  The  surrounding moun-tains are not abrupt like the style of  Derjanine,  but rounded as the verses of  Jaajkofi  mith  striking  vegeta-tion, but nowhere either oaks or roses. Only here  arid 

there some passing clouds project poetry on some mountain pick.  Oh!  I am  now spoiled by nature like a happy lover;  .I  am capricious  like  a proud lord  ; I do not con. descend to look at aught  common  or ordinary. The braying  a d  neighing herds retnrned from their pasture.       

> THE COABT O F THE CAEPIAX SEA.

5 7

The people being  placed  in a circle, discoursed and made anoise. I, extended on my  bourka,  smoked  quietly  m y  pipe, inspiring in turns  the  fragrant  vapour  of  America  and 

the  pure air of  Asin.  Children almost naked jumped around me  ; further on, enormous mastiffs, growling with distrust, amused the new comers  ; meantime women  drew 

water with pitchers, and came to and fro carrying them on their heads. Through all the grades of nature, commencing mith the rational being  down  to the stone, reigned a sort of infantine, and as it were  biblic,  simplicity. I t is but here-it is only in the Orient that you will comprehend the pictures and the costumes of the Books of the Old Testament. The  hieroglyph  xi11  become a letter-the enigma a living  rord. 

I n a quarter of an hour, all was readp-the horses sad-dled and waiting. " Is it far to the Town?" "Two  agatch 

bigurn."  "And  how;  is not this too much?" "Perhaps; who has measured them  '1  " I t is  more  than seven hours. Please God we may  arrive  for the night in the kingdom of Silk, that city so renowned in our songs and tales, that neither the Czar  Czarewitz,  nor the Prince Royal, nor John, the s9n of the merchant, mill dare to mount a horse, without 

a Circassian  sadde  and a silk bridle of  Shamakha. 

They bring two good horses-good  on17  because they do not bite. The foot in the stirrup, the whip in hand, and we start. I ascend the rapid slope-a, slope most rapid, of a very high mountain. I reach the summit; I trample the snow, which melts; I hasten to salute the sun, which hides  itseIf  behind the black mountains of the 

Karabakh.  I t went away  like  a Pasha in the inaccessible. doors of his fortress, surrounded by Janissaries, the clouds streaming with gold and purple. Oh! without having 

> 8:

5 8 THE  CAUCASUS. 

seen it, it is  irnpossiblc  to imagine-and it is impossible, afterohaving seen it, to describe  a11  the  bcauty  of  h i s 

twilight. A sort of  sweet,  transparent violet mist covers like a veil all this mountain world.  Like  a grey dove which descends from on high on its native roof, so lowers on the earth the loveliness of a twilight, and it seems to you as if you heard the movement of its  wings,  as if you felt on your cheeks the  dew  which it drops  from  its odoriferous wings.  And  all is silent-all from the voice of nature to the very passions of men, which appear to be drowned in the pious silence of prayer, and which heaven receives  mith 

a benediction.  Yes, it is not in vain that the mountains have been the primitive temples, and thanksgiving the only sort of prayer. At least my mind, like the Mimosa, has  always  f&  itself collapsed by the rude hand of misfortune, nor has the stillness of solitude or the incense of the prayer re-opened it.  When  the lion of death growled at my side-when one thunderclap after the other smote my heart-I confess that I have not thought; i t pusillanimity to demand pardon 'of the Most  High;  Iconsidered to offend eternal justice by the thought, that atardy repentance or a prayer out of  place  could change the decisions of eternity. I inclined then my head in saying : "Thy will be done  !"  But when God by his breath moved the waves of the sen, and when those i n their 

rolling  rose like a wall i n the distance, anxious, but impo-tent, to devour m e ; when he then sent me those rare moments-very rare moments-but full of a pure and  holy 

joy, then my prayer was disinterested, and my thanks-giving an echo of his high beneficence,  espressed  in tears of deep emotion-tears of joy, which even  long  subsequent misfortune could not quench. Fate has tracked  out  my       

> T H E COAST O F THE CASPIAN SEA.

59 

path  amongst thorns and stones, night and storm; but to me  dso  the stars have shone at times, and I knew  how  to bless each ray which fell on mc. Most often those sparks of happiness have reached me when I erred on the heights of mountains. I then understood with my soul that hymn of praise, "Glory to the Lord of heavens and peace on earth.'' I descend, and I again ascend to the summit. The earth  sIumbers  in the arms of heaven.  How  the heaven is fire ! I look,  and cannot cease Iooking ; because, can one exhaust immensity? can the heart become  fatigued  of -eternal, inimitable beauty? The sun sheds forth from its invisible eye the vermillion of the face of the west. The clouds  play  on the horizon,  and  change every mo-ment their strange images, in drowning themselves in the nearest obscurity. Yes, the heavens meditate on the pre-sent moment; those clouds resemble  now  the visions of the just, who  now  fall asleep; they belong at the same time to the heavens and the earth-to one and the other li  fc .

See ! it is night: she has profusely sown the heavens with stars, which shine with ardour, but also  mith  mystery under this blue skull: are then the thoughts of the universe always clear, always unchanging : there are letters, of which we can  hardly  compose a word, and this word is GOD !

We proceed  constautly,  and the road seems endless. 

Sharnakha  seemed to peep out  once.or  twice between the waves of  clouds,  and then has again disappeared. I have been more than once  nearly  drowned  myself in the swamp,-in every hole formed by the  thawing  snow. The 

horse also often sunk up to his breast,  ,and  to drag 60  THE  CAUCASUS. him out, it  required  every time at  l e s t  ten  strokes  of the whip, and twenty Russian and Tartar oaths min-gled. If, at least, the moon would appear. If one  speal~s 

of her, she appears. Direct to our  appeal,  she at once jumped out of the heavens. She strides without marching; she shines without appearing; at times she amuses herself to walk  with  the stars; at times she pursues the stars, and has no thought to  afford  sufficient  light  to an  honest 

traveller. Oh, moon! do not forget  thy  duty-do not quarrel with me, or else I ill  bring  a suit against thee. Let us put the moon in prose. 

Prirno.-The  age of this old coquette is very equivocal. There are people who say that she could be the grandmother of the earth; others say that, in times past, she has held the office as a comet; like the erring  few  she had strolled in all the universe, and changed en  pussant  one celestial sys-tem for another, as we change  those  of philosophy ;then the centripetal force of the earth had attracted her, and then she has permanently settled  down  in the capacity of a satellite and drags on after the earth up to the present time; mixes herself up with ebb and  floocl  and the asylums of lunatics, shovers on her parcels of volcanoes, in gratifying her mistress  from  time of a cargo of  molites 

and shooting stars. It is said that the spots which the poets take for the  eyes, 

the nose and the mouth of the moon, and the  vulgar  for the image of  Cain-obliged,  so to say, to carry continually the corpse of the brother  whom  he had killed-are but the shadow of immense mountains of the moon, and the bottom of immense precipices which the rays of the sun are unable to illumine. The 'most probable,  however,  is, that those spots are the wrinkles of age. T H E COAST O F THE  Ch6PIAB  SEA. 61 .The  adulterous moon does not only help lovers. Read 

Basil  Hall, and  you  will see that the moon is the  ally  of 

the  smugglers and  ~irates.  What concerns robbers on land 

you  may  address  yourselves to me. I mill tell you many interesting things of those knights of the moon, although they have never been knights of the order of the moon. "Apropos  Tchapar,  are there no robbers here ? "

Robbers, he answers, we hear no more of at present. It is more than a month since a single man has been killed,-robberies are committed here from time to time,-the young people require some amusement; these are trifles; but in former times,-silence, dog,- do you hear-silence, I tell thee.  " Formerly,  Tchapur,  what  ? "

H e does not cease to bark; he has caught the scent of of some beast. My greyhound  became  restive, and scratching the ground and moving his ears, sprung  back~vards  and  forwards. 

Might not some robbers be  near  in .earnest? Iprimed my pistol, spurred my fatigued horse, and ascended the hill, 

where  the hound barked  furiousIy. 

The moon shoue  right  on the summit and there . . . . 

I t is the custom in all the mountains of the Caucasus,  t o 

erect a sort  ofkiosk  on the grave of  Cheikhs,  or Pins;  viz., 

people who have  well  deserved of Allah for their Moslem  *

purity. Often they are  dedicaled  t o the memory of pilgrims deceased at Mecca, or to people  who  have been slain in foreign wars. Every passer-by tears off a piece of his garment, attaches it to one of the branches, which are there placed for that purpose, prays for the soul of the dead, and asks of heaven a happy journey. On the top  of  the hill, which I had just ascended, there mas a rude and  dat 

stone  and  on it a human  skull,  which held in its teeth  a6.3 THE CAUCASUS. 

# .shining piece of silver money.  I shuddered at seeing  t l m e 

inanimate remains of a human being.  I t  mas  frightcuing  ;-

his eyes had the appearance of charcoal, his teeth looked as if they were gnashing. At my call the Tchapar comes,  looks,  and becomes pale 

like  a shroud.  " Allah,  Allah," says he,  " to  what  damned place have we arrived ? I had purposely avoided this hill, and yet here we are; Aga, this is a bad omen. Let us tear off a strip as a sacrifice and let us go, that Allah map preserve us." And the Tchapar, in throwing  domn  his offering, had 

already  started : fright  mas depicted on his face.  When  Imet him again, he turned round  and  drove on his horse.  

> "

Who  is here buried, in this tomb, Tchapar ? Why  is it that, contrary to the usage of the believer, his skull is placed on the sepulchral stone ? "

" A  very guilty person lies there, a great curse rests on this spot,"  an'd  the  TcSapar  began to narrate to me the 

history  of a malefactor, whose very soul had been repulsed by hell and rejected by the earth. 

"Who  is there?" shouted the sentry at the entrance of Shamakha. I rubbed my eyes  with  astonishment, as if I had tumbled from the times of the past, to the door of Shamakha. 

"A soldier," answered I to the sentry. 

# " What name ? " was  asked  again, perceiving that I was a

stranger. .

"ALEXANDER MARLINSKI."  

> "

Please; let me see your travelling ticket." CHAPTER  IV. 

XEXATE.               

> Y...... viva mi serrann
> Con su pe' nndduz ;
> Elh ei mi sobemna,
> Ni vids ymi cruz

# ......      

> Sus ojoa son veneno Su mirar mi luz

# .;.... 

WHAT are our females, pale and insipid, compared  with 

those of the brown tint and the dark eyes of the Caucasus? -What the sun of the north is compared with that of the south-what the mountains of Scotland are to those of the Caucasus-that is  Menate  at the side of Marian. I am un-killing to lower any oue, but I cannot make a mountain of a heap of sand.  K O  doubt the fair ones of the north possess their peculiar charms, and I am the last  who  could prefer a savage, be she ever so handsome, to a civilized woman ; but  all  the different tastes centre in nature,  and 

what is nearest to nature is better than anything else. Moreover, the  hero  of this adventure is neither an effe-minate  Petchorin,*  nor an abortive  0negine.t  H e mas an 

# * The hero of a  tale  of  Lermontof,  entitled  '$The  Ecro  of our Time." 

t The hero of a tale  of  Poushkin,  entitled  " EugincOnegine,"-etten  in 

> rhyme.

64 THE CAUCASUS. exception in nature, who had commenced his career in the Caucasus, and  who  ended it in Siberia;  who  had  spent his 

life  betmeen  the tent and the mines; a man  of the times of Alexander, and not of Nicholas, of whom  Russia  may be proud-a companion of the great conspiracy with Bes-toueff, Jakoubovitch. Who does not  know  that name, celebrated in the annals of the Russian conspiracy of  1825? 

H e mas a man of high station. Even his  father  is renowned -marshal of the nobility at  Pultawa-on  account of his high bearing, his fiery character, his animated speech and look; but, in this case, the father  owes  his celebrity to his son. Two such fine minds as  Menate  and Jakoubovitch had only to meet for either loving or combating each other. Jakoubovitch was one of the  favourite  officers of Genera1 Jermoloff; this  Moscowian  devil; this fright of the Circas-

sians  ; this patriot, so much loved by the soldiers. There must have been more than one point of resemblance between the simple officer and his general  ; and if the for-mer is gone to Siberia for expiating his participation in the conspiracy of  1835,  it may be that, after all, the  seconci  had not been quite a stranger to it. I recollect well that it was then feared that  the  corps of the Caucasus might separate itself from the army, and hoist the  coiours  of the insurrection. The ambition of Jermoloff was equal to his liberal sentiments. Nicholas, at least, could have had this fear in removing him from the command. Jakoubovitch held but an inferior rank, but the friendship of Jermoloff confided to him; at times, important places and expeditions. Then, as is  the  case now, the Tchetchenes gave much t o do to Russia; but the strokes of 

Jermoloff,  more  deciclccl  and  more substantial  than  those of  

> M E N B T E .

65 

his accuser, sufficed soon to re-establish Russian power, since then so often compromised in those quarters.  Jakou-

bovitch possessed a high degree of reputation amongst the mountain people; he had, in numerous engagements, killed several Circassians, and courage  always  obtains the esteem of a gallant enemy; at least it  is  the case with the Circassian mountaineers. He could pass, unmolested, to and from the Tchetchenes. Moreover, peace alternated with war in the Daghestan, and then the armies came often as guests on the territories of the contending parties. Jakoubovitch had seen  Menate,  the daughter of a

Tchetchene  Bey. To see and love her succeeded each other instantaneously; because, what is love but the desire to possess? The art of coquetting does not  exist  amongst primitive people, or assumes other forms. It does  not 

consist in giving promises to one, while we may love another. The Caucasian maid holds  her  heart in her hand, and bestows one together mith the other, without any refined calculation. 

The  Tchetchenian girls are not so handsome as the  Circas-

sian,  properly so called; still  Menate  could not be seen without being admired. She had not the foot of the  mountain 

maidem,  because she  wdked  but little; her waist mould have filled with  envy  all our land damsels; her eye was that of a gazelle, brilliant and piercing, and her  long  hair could surround the stoutest man. It was at this time that Amoulat-Bey had surrendered, and Jermoloff generously pardoned his former deeds, when, by some unknown means, the Lesghien chief escaped from the Russian camp, after having assassinated  hh  benefactor, who, charmed by his great beauty, had obtained for him the pardon of the general commander in chief. 

> I

66  T H E CAUCASUS. Amoulat Bey escaped to the mountains, revoked to the Tchetchenes, and the aoul where  Bienate  lived took up his cause. The  general  concentrated his troops, and  tool< 

measures, of nhich he thought to possess the secret. But he intended to strike before others the  neighbouring 

aoul, for the sake of re-establishing the fear of the  Russian 

arms. H e entrusted Jakoubovitch with the mission.  '

Never was any order more welcome than that he received. He took, at once, a couple of hundred of picked  Cossacks, 

and made himself followed by some infantry, in case that his 

coup de main should not succeed,  and  marched by a way mhich he alone  knew,  as he had often passed it to visit  Menate.  What does not love do ? Once it animated knights errant; to-day it leads brigands. This time it inspired Jakoubovitch with a celerity and force which made his enterprise succeed. The corps of Cossacks  flew 

like a drove of vultures,  aud,  like such, precipitated itself upon the aoul before the break of day, when sleep, most profound, yet rested upon all its dwellers.  Jalioubovitch 

hastened towards the  sakle  (the hut) of  Menate,  followed by his best horsemen. He awoke her from her sleep, and carried her  off,  while the soldiers plundered the aoul. Only a few  discharges of  muslietry  had been  exchanged 

during the whole enterprise. The inhabitants awoke at last; but the Russians had already driven off the cattle which they had seized. At the entrance of the village, however, the Tchetchenes bounded on the Cossacks with precipi-tation. The contest was terrible. A ball struck  Jakoubo-

vitch  on his forehead, but did not put him down. The pistol smoked yet in the hand of the man who had discharged it, when Jakoubovitch, pushing his horse towards him, cut him down with his sword.  Menate  uttered a cry of horror, which, however, her  abducer  did not hear. The Russian infantry showed itself just in time to rescue the Cossacks. Some weeks after the battle, Jakoubovitch was reclining on his  s o t ,  mith his bandaged head.  Menate  mas seated at his side. 

## " I t is still on thy account that I suffer," said the patient. 

A trace of pride flushed  over  the features of  Menate, 

DO you suffer much ? "

"1 would riot suffer so much if thou  wouldst  say that thou  lovest  me. Is it then so hard to thee to say this single word ? "

Menate  remained silent. 

# " Thou  hatest  the Russians. Speak,  Nenate;  open thy mind to  me." 

"We are fond of war,  and  especially of war with a gene-rous enemy. W e cannot reproach you mith the last affair. It was we who provoked it by embracing the cause of 

Amoulat  Bey. But he is  conqnered,  and has fled. Peace has been restored to our aouls. I know that my country-men detest the Russians, but they make a distinction between the bad and  good.',  

> "

Oh ! if thou  didst  not detest me, thou  wouldst  love me." To love thee ! And what  mouldst  thou make of me ?

A plaything, which thou  wouldst  send back, one  day,  to my father; and nhich my parents mould not take back  ." 

"Thou knowest me not,  Menate;  I am a man with-out prejudice. I went  where  I have attached myself. Thou knowest the  essavul,  the Cossack officer here; he is married to a Circassian,  whom  he abduced. Why 

should  I not  do-the  same ? If it be this which holds thee 68 T R E  CAGCASUS. 

back, cease to fear, and love me ! Dost  thou  miH  it ?

Thou  dost  not answer." "I never do answer things of this sort." 

# " How, never ! thou  hast,  therefore, heard  them  ofttimes ?

But, tell me, art thou not engaged-dost thou not love 

already  ? Fool that I was not to perceive that that which had attracted me in thee must have been pleasing to others, long before me. Oh ! speak ! speak ! "

Menate,  who perceived that jealousy animated the  fead 

tures  of Jakoubovitch, fearful lest his excitement  would 

impair his  votmd,  took his hand and said  :-"  Calm thyself; do not think of me. Why laughest thou ? "

# " I shall recover of my wound in the forehead, but not SO easily of that of the heart. But,  Menate,  thou art in my power-thou art my prisoner, and therefore my  slave. 

Dost  thou know it  1 "

"See, that is the reason why I do not answer your question. Love cannot be hidden. And you are too good amaster to force me to  lo~re you." I f love, as we have defined it,  is  the desire to possess, still it is not actual possession which charms us the most ;

the realisation of our desires is the culminating point whence begins the decline of our inclinations; the most 

edivening  portion of love is the hope with which is mixed, jealousy-in fact, passion yet unrequited. Jakoubovitch belonged to that order of candid minds who do not understand women, not having made them an especial study; who, in fine, are not rich and corrupt enough to make a woman their plaything; who, instead of lowering them, elevate them in their own eyes, and embellish them, in their own imagination. He had near him a brother officer, younger than himself, and who,  

> MENATE.

69 without being cold-hearted, knew  how  to resist the first impulsions, so much so, that Jakoubovitch was in the habit of calling him "his dear egotiste." When, in  the 

evening,  the  tea was served, he said to him, "Well, my dear egotiste, what have you to tell me of,  new  or con-soling? " This was his way of entering into conversation; just as Lermontoff used to say to his comrades,  " Tell us one of those charming tales which you tell so well." "I  shall  always sing the same strain," answered the 

officer, whose name it is unnecessary to mention. "Love is madness; it is more than madness, it is an error which leads us to the committal of many more." "Yes, I am wounded because I have carried off  Menate; 

others have been so because they put their hand on a sheep. No, my dear egotiste, love is a sacred thing, which pro-duces self-devotion-self-sacrifice." "What, then, is  all  this ? Two  other follies ! Love engenders jealousy, distrust, hatred, disquietude." 

# " Thou  hast  never loved."  

> "

I have never committed this sort of folly." "And shalt thou never yet commit it  ? " 

> "

Never." 

# " We must forswear nothing. The  whole  life of man is one string of follies. Thou  amusest  thyself  with  drink; I, on the contrary, get  drunk  with love." 

'(But  I never get tipsy, and thou art  intoxicated." 

Menate  listened, without understanding anything of this conversation in Russian, when some presents,  mhich 

Jakoubovitch had made her, mere brought  in. She under-stood this language, and when the other officer was gone, she said to Jakoubovitch  i-7'0 T H E  CAUCASUS.  

> "

I wish not that you should create yourself illusions ; Imust not  Iove  you-I am betrothed." 

Jakoubovitch  fixed  his eyes on her for a moment, and then said :-"With you girls,  one  comes  always too late. You begin to love with your first breath of life, as the birds begin to sing, and the plants to scatter their perfumes about ; but there are misfortunes more formid-able than this. The days follow each other-but are unlike each other."  

> "

I have promised  ; and I mill be the wife of none but aTchetchene." "But I love thee, Nenate. Knomest thou what this 

word  contains of passion, of suffering, and of hope ? Wilt 

thou break  my  heart ? "

"You are a man, and you ought to suffer  with  greater fortitude than we poor women. You mould certainly not wish that I should break  my  oath. I dare not  -I  must not love you. I must  know  how to rule my heart, as I have dis-posed of it, Interest cannot change my resolve, and your Padi-shah (Emperor) himself could not be my husband." "No, because I know  that you love me, but you  will 

forget me. I s it not so ? "

Jakoubovitch took between his teeth the handkerchief 

which  mas around his wounded head, and mas silent. The next morning two Tchetchenian chiefs were announced,  who  wished to see him. One was the father, and the other the betrothed of  Menate.  On entering, the father cast a searching look at his daughter. 

((1 do not know whether I shall  open my arms to thee. 

Art thou yet but a prisoner, or art thou already a kept woman  ULJ' 

Menate  pointed at the wound of Jakoubovitch, as if to  

> MENATE.

71 

show that a sick man mas not to be dreaded. Then saying that he was as noble-hearted as brave, she embraced her father. I n the meanwhile  Jakoubovitch  observed the companion of the old man, and by the large wound, hardly healed, which he  had  over his face, he recognized his adversary of the  last  rencontre. "What do you  want  of me  ?"  said he to him.  

> "

IIear,  Russian," said the Tchetchene ; "they say thou art noble and great. I have experienced thy courage and the force of thy arm, and I come to try thy mind. Thou 

hast  taken my bethrothed. Return her to me." There mas in the look and motions of the Tchetchene a freedom and hope which pleased him. "Thou  wouldst  not like to do  ill,"  said the father of 

Menate;  "make a father unhappy, and deprive a bride of her  deare2t  friend  ?" 

"I shall do all that," said Jakoubovitch, "if  Menate 

mill consent. I t is left to her  to  decide on her lot." "Let me return to my native  land;  return me to my father, to him  \vho  was destined to become my husband." "Well, then, take her," answered  Jakoubovitch,  turn-ing his head. The footsteps of horses soon informed him that  Menate 

mas returning to the place whence he had taken her. The friend of Jakoubontch  came  in at this moment. "Thou milt then ever commit follies-one mas to carry off this woman,  and  the other to give her back." "I think I have done a good action, and it renders  me 

more happy than the possession of a woman whose heart belongs to another." "And some say that woman is better than man. I72 THE CAUCASUS. admire thee,  mg  friend; but I approve not thy action.  It 

mould appear, moreover, that whoever is first at the  mill 

gets the first grist." The wound of  Jakoubovitch  healed, but never became closed. H e was aftermards often seen before a mirror, feeling the fractures of his skull, and he never ceased  to 

wear a bandage on his head. Some years aftermards he  vias  at St. Petersburg;  and  on the 14th December, 1825, on  the  Isaac square. The Emperor gave him several orders respecting the insurgents, not knowing that he mas one of the conspirators.  Jakou-

bovitch  had a  loaded  pistol by him, and could easily have shot the Emperor. By may of gratitude the magnanimous 

Czar sent him to Siberia, under a sentence of hard labour.     

> DESCIt1PCIO.V 05' T i I E C O U X T R T .

# 7 3

# CHAPTER  W.    

> DESCRIPTIOS OF TiIE

COUXTRT.           

> Caucasu3-EIbrous-Kasbek-Conft~sion concerning that Nnmc-ksccnsions
> --Veneration of the Xountains among the Oasctians--Paitigorsk-
> Composition of the

Chain-Passages-The Black and Caspian Seas-The Rivers of the  Caucasus-Kouban-Terek-Eou-Rhion-Koissou-  

> Their tributary Streams-Want of Lakes.

T ~ Evord  Caucasus is, according to  Plinius,  derived from the Scythian  word  G ~ I L U C ~ S U S , which means whitened  by 

the snow. But nothing has yet been brought forward in favour of that etymology. We think it preferable to derive Caucasus from  Koh-Chaf  or  Ckasp,  signifying Caspian 

JIounts.  The Turks call it Kaf-Daghi ; and  Daghi  means a mountain. With regard to the natives, they give i t the name of Elbrous,  which  is a generic Persian  word  meaning Icy  Nountains. 

The chain of the Caucasus extends from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea, and is divided into two parts, the northern and the southern.  Its  length from Anapa to 

Baliou  is 690 English miles,  but  its breadth is only 30 leagues, if the inferior  Caucasus-th2t  is Ararat-be not included.  *

It3  highest summits arc  Elbrous  and Kasbek.  Thc 

height  of the first is, according to Lenz, 16,330 feet ; and 

> K

74  T H E CAUCASUS. 

that of the second, according to Parrot and  Engelharclt, 

14,400. The  Circassians  give  to Elbrous the name of  Dshin-

Padischah-that is the King of the Spirits  ; and also that of  Nogai-Huscha,  the meaning of  n-hich  is the Mountain of the Nogai (Tartars). The Tartars themselves call it Kaf-Dagh  ; but in Hunga-rian  Elborilloz  signifies, "Thou prostrate thyself before that sacred mountain." Kasbelc is called by the  natires  Nquinvari  and also  Urs-

Coch, meaning White Mount. The word Kasbek has led to several mistakes,  nhich  n e  are going to explain. 

We  read in Klaporth*  :-"  Mr.  Gamba  is mistaken when he says that it was General  Kasbelr  who  gave that name to the village and mountain." The anonymous author of the  (' Letters on the Caucasus and GeorgiayJ t says:-"Arrit-ed  at  the  place  called  Kashek, 

me mere received very politely by Colonel  Kasihek,  thus 

called  after  the mountain of that name, at the foot of  nhicll 

he dwells." 

A General  might  indeed.  give his name to a mountain ;

for on a map done at St.  Petersburg  by  General Shubert the mountain  BIerchotchi  is called  Weliaruinofi',  after the name of a General well known in the Caucasus. But Kasbek is not a proper name  ; it is the Persian title 

Kasi-bey,  which is hereditary in the family  Tsobichau-

Chmili,  entrwted  with the office of guarding the defile and administering the plain of the Upper Terek in the dis-trict Chewi. The Russians have given to the prairie, to  the  mountain, and to  t l x  village the name of  Stephan  Tzminda  Hasbek. 

As the family Tsobichata, of an  Ossetian  origin, Bas entered            

> +Description of the Caucasus fEmiburg, 1815.
> D E S C R I P T I O N OF THE CGUNTRY.

75 

the service  of  Russia, it is not at all surprising  that  a

travelIer  met, in 1812, a colonel and his son, a major, called Kasbek. Mr.  Ditson,  in his recent journey to the Caucasus,  says 

that he could not learn the history of the church of 

Zminda.  We think that he referred to Stephan-Zmindi, a church which was erected by the  wife  of the prince of 

Kasbeck,  who was a native of Kabardah, and a Christian woman. The Elbrous is distinguished by  trro  summits; and the 

Kasbek  has only  one,  of a conic form. The first mountain has a likeness to the Two  Marnelles  of the Island of France, 

and  was ascended upon the  23rd  of July, 1829, by a  Kabar-

dian  Khillar,  who  formed a part of the  espedition  under-taken for that purpose by General Emmanuel. 

According  to a tradition, Noah's ark stopped on the Elbrous before reaching the Ararat; and the cradle of 

Christ  is found on the Kasbek, standing above the tent of Abraham, mhich is itself suspended in the air. The same tradition relates that there is a treasure mhich has tempted several persons, whose curiosity has always  heen  punished by the loss of their sight. The indigenous consider the mountains as deities, and pay them divine honours. The  Ossetians  specialIy  venerate the  Siliara,  or the tops of Brut-Sabsdi. If the high summits are generally  called  white or snowy mountains, the appellation of dark mountains is, on the con-trary, bestowed on those which are  lower,  and which, at one extremity, extend  towards  the  Black Sea, and at the other towards the Caspian Sea. On the east of the Elbrous arises a group of five mountains, properly called  Bechtan  ;as  besch  means  " five," i 6 THE CAUCASUS. 

and  dagh  signifies a mountain. The same group is, in Russian,  called  Piatigorie, from  piat,  " five,"  and  g ~ l . o ,  

> "

mountain." The one which stands i n  the  middle  is 

named Beshtovaia Corn. But  3Iashut  is the  highest  of all Then  comes  Gelesnaia Gora (iron mountain), and next, 

Smeinltia  Gora, which means the mountain of the serpents. 

On  the east are situated Barbel, Shah-Dagh,  Dast-Dagh, 

Barbs-Dagh,  and, finally, near the Caspian Sen, Besh-Par-

maki-Dagh,  that is the mountain of the five fingers, whose height is 3,000 feet. 

Kasbels  is of a volcanic origin, and its side is. covered 

with  erqtive  matter. Porphyry,  In  the upper sheets, and 

granite,  standing underneath, form the principal nucleus, which  l o ~ ~ e r s towards  the east in calcareous or clay strata. There are more than four passages which lead from Europe to Asia. There are six which cross the chief part of the chain; two  roads  are principally  frequented-th 

passage of  Dariel,  which was, for the first time, crossed with  military  stores by General Todleben.  That  passage was the Porta  Caucasia  of the ancients. The other road extends along the  Caspian  Sea, and leads through the passage of Derbend, from  Iiisliar  to Bakou. 

However,  the most easy communications are carried  ou 

through  the  sea. But me must here remark that the Black Sea deserves  it3  ominous appellation, not on account of the colour of its water, but on account of the tempests that rage there. The ancients were  known  for their dread 

of  the  Pout-Euxine.  I n fact disasters have been numerous on that Sea. The greatest, in modern times, occurred  iu 

1838,  when  several Russian men of mar were  shipwrecked, 

and driven  aground  near  Suhum-Kale.  

> "

To  navigate  the  Erucine  before  the  mouth  of  ahy,  or     

> D E S C R I P T I O N OF T H E COUXTRY. r c t l

after that of September, is  esteemed  the most  unqucation-

able  instance of rashness and folly."-(Gibbon,  "ltoman 

Empire,,'  I,  159.) 

The Caspian Sea  ogers  perhaps still greater dangers. We 

shall  have  an opportunity of speaking of it in another place. As the Caucasus is  ~ a s h e d by those  two  seas-the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, i t is not  difficult  for the Russians to maiatain their power  over  the two opposite sides of the country and to carry on mar. In fact, whilst they easily receive the stores destined for them, they prevent, by their blockade, their enemies from obtaining any assistance. 

Wowe~er, the results hare not answered the expectations that were entertained  ; and the expenses for garrisons and ships  have  much exceeded the amount that  had  been con-sidered sufficiect. The Russians bring the provisions  down  the  Volga,  and dram from Siberia their ammunition of war; but both articles are of  Sad  quality;  for,  by passing through  the 

hands of different dishonest agents, they  are  ordinarily in a wretched condition when  they  reach their destination. Besides, me must add that the English and  the  Turks find out the means, in spite of the blockade, of conveying, through Suhum-Kale, assistance to the Circassians. There is no  sca  without rivers which empty their waters into it. These rivers are so many arteries, which lead the enemy into the interior of the country. But the rivers of the Caucasus are confined  within  narrow beds. They are, 

the most part of them,  only  torrents, very little fit for navigation; and issuing at a short distance of the  sea, 

they run rapidly towards it through a stony soil. More-over, in the spring, they overflow their  banks,  and inundate a vast  estcnt  of the country,  ~ ~ l i i c h they  thus  render 

impracticable  to  thc  Russian armies. 75  THE CAUCASUS. Another feature in  the  Caucasns  is the absence of  lakes, 

for there are none except a  small  one on mount  Khoi. 

This is owing to the fact, that mountains are there too steep and too close to one another to allow  water  to collect and remain there. The three principal  rivers  of the Caucasus are the Kouban, the  Trrek,  and the  Kour.  The first  issues  from 

Elbrous,  and after having overrun an extent of five hundred versts, it divides into three  arms,  tmo of which fall into the Sea of Azov, and the third into the Black Sea. The  small 

and  the great Selentchuck, Laba,  and  Croup,  are its tributary streams. The  Terek  takes its source in  the  Kasbek,  and runs four hundred versts. I t crosses the passage of Dariel; it divides the territory of  Kabardah  into small and great Kabardah, and falls, near  Kisliar,  into the Caspian Sea. Its chief tributary streams are the Mallra and  the 

S undscha. The  Kaur,  the  Cyrus  of the ancients, runs  over  a length of eight hundred versts. I t is the deepest of  all,  but it is generally narrow. I t takes its source in Turkey, in the mountains of Kars, divides Georgia into two parts, and falls near Saljan into the Caspian Sea. The Araxe joins its waters to those of  the  Kour,  near Dchewat ; and the Aragoua  flows  into it at  Mtzetki. 

The  Rhion,  called  Phasis  by the ancients, crosses Immeretia and  Mingrelia,  and after a course of  two  hundred versts, and after having received the waters of the  " River of Horses," Tcheni-Tzchale (Hippius), and those of  the 

Kririla,  it falls into the Black Sea near Pote. The Koissou crosses  Daghestan  under  the  names of 

An&-Avar-Kara-Kasikoum~'1~-Koissou, and Soulak. E T H N O G R A P H Y . CHAPTER  TI.    

> ETHSOGRAPHY.
> Population-Circassian Race, its beauty-Adighe-Manners-Lesghicms-
> Tchctchencs

-dbhascs  - Ossotians  -Allans  -Souanes  -Ingoushes  -                      

> Kabardia~ls-Georgians, their mode uf life-Irnmeretians, their costume,
> libations and dancing-Jfingelims-Princes DatLiani-Armenians, -their qualities-Tartars, their language-Koumikes-Cossacks, dcveloprnent of
> tkeir Colonies or Sfuwit:as--Colonies of Kars, of Xadjar, of Vladimirovlia.

W E can know but  app~oximately  the  number  of the 

Circassians,  who laugh at the Russians for counting men like cattle. Russian registers have only some value with regard to the subjected races. The estimates of the population of the  whole  isthmus, by different writers, vary 

from  one  million  and  a half  to three  d l i o n s . 

But if the number of the Tcherkesses able to fight could, in the beginning of the mar, be carried to 700,000, i t could be so no longer,  now  that Kabardah takes no share in the struggle. The above number would indeed allow as to suppose a

population of three millions and a half, if it were admitted that  a31  able men bear arms, which is not the case; for, though women are now and then seen fighting in the  ranks 

of the Circassians, yet the peasants are only, through  excep-80  T:IE  CAUCASUS. E T H N O G R A P H Y . 81 

tion,  called  upon  to take up arms. I t is therefore the utmost, if,  with  the addition of the last  acquisiticas  tslien 

from Persia and Turkey, we can carry to 3,000,000 the population placed under the administration of the Gover-

nor-general  of  Tiflis. 

Now,  the greatest part is peaceful or allied to the Russians. The Armenians,  the  Georgians, the  Mingre-

Iiaus  and the  Irnmeretislns  side with the Russians, who have formed a militia among the Ossetians, the Georgians, and other tribes. We therefore should be on the right side if we cut off a figure out of the  700,000  already  men-tioned. If, by the denomination of  " Circassian race,"  which  is applied to all Europe, it mere intended to express that  all

its inhabitants came from the Caucasus, the error  vould 

be great indeed; for the Caucasus  could  never have con-tained a population sufficiently numerous to supply so vast a migration. Besides, many tribes, which now occupy its soil, are not aborigines. Therefore, by Circassiau race, we 

merely  mean the most  regday  type of the white race. Circassian beauty has been  by  far too much extolled, and the praises lavished on the  Circassians  are only de-served by  noblemen  3.n  d wornen  ; for the mass of the popu-lation supplies also its fair share of ugly and ill-shaped 

individuals.  Yet a nation never was robbed of its beauty ;

and  now  types of a striking beauty are found among the Cossacks of the Black Sea. The Circassians, more than any other people, have been free from a  mixture  with other races; and yet, which is worthy of remark, whenever such a mixture has  taken 

place, it has given the ascendancy to the Circassian blood, and the inferior race has been improved  by  it. Now no trace has been left of the sojourn of the  &bar-

dims  in  Crimea;  of the  mixture  of the Chozars with  the 

Tartars;  whilst  Circassian women have embellished  the 

Turks and the Russians. This fact is  specially  to be witnessed in the  Stanitza 

Tcherwenaia, the primitive colonists of which-Russian soldiers-seized upon Tcherkessian women. Their union has produced a population finer than that of their  neigh-

bows. 

With regard to the improvement of the Circassian race, which some German travellers have been pleased to attri-bute to the Allans, me question it. Now let us come to a survey of the different Tcherkessian tribes, and let us begin by stating that the Circassians do not call themselves Tcherkesses, a word which, in the Turkish language, means robbers or cut-throats. But, in other languages, it is a corruption of the  Ker-

ketes of the ancients.  Tcher,  in Persian, means a warrior, and  kes,  somebody. The Russians give the collective name of Tcherkesses to all the mountaineers of the Caucasus, who are divided into many tribes, among  whom  the  Adighe 

hold  the first rank; they are, in fact, considered as  belong-

ing to the purest  Circa3ian  race. Pagans are amongst them more numerous than the  Mussulmans.  Noblemen and princes alone profess Islamism. The peasants worship a god of the thunder and of war,  Thibte  ; a god of the fire, a god of the water, a god of the forests, and a god  bf  the travellers. They observe the law of retaliation or blood; practise hospitality and the right of asylum, a distinctive feature with almost all the Circassians, They consider celibacy and  emboupoint  shameful. Princes distribute the lands to the nobility. Warriors form a separate caste ; and  

> LTHE CAUCASUS.

although  all  the peasants bear arms, yet they go  to  W ~ L

but only on extraordinary circumstances. The  diffirent  classes are distinguished one from the other through the  colour  of their slippers. Princes wear red slippers; noblemen,  yellow  ; and the peasants, black. With regard to matrimony, young girls are sewed up in stags' skins,  which  the husband cuts open with his dagger on the night of his nuptials. Their slaves are composed of prisoners of mar. The  Adighe  are natives of 

Kouban;  Anapa is the most important place of their country. The  Lesyhians  (Lesges)  inhabit  Daghestan  (mountainous country), and the Russians find them the most troublesome of all  ; but they are divided into many tribes, and  their 

population amounts to about 400,000. The  Tchechenes  amount only to 25,000 inhabitants ;

but, nevertheless, they are in a continual state of revolt against the Russians, by  whom  they are every time sub-dued again, but to no purpose. The Russians have attempted to write the  Circas-

sian,  through the medium of the  T d i s h  alphabet-the 

didectze  Kabardah; hut the language more generally understood is the Tartar. The  Abhasians  differ  $om  the preceding races, not only with regard to the features of their physiognomy, but also to their manners. Less addicted to war than the  Circassians, 

they also  more  willingly submit to the Russians; they are, nevertheless, the most ancient inhabitants of the Caucasus, and it is pretended that they descend from the  Abyssinians.  They are indifferent as regards religious matters; and though Christianity mas, in the time of 

Justinian,  iutroduced among them, yet their religion is  

> ETENOQRAPHY.

83 merely a mixture of Paganism and Islamism.  They  par-ticularly venerate the oak. I t is among them that  the 

monarchial principle is most deeply rooted; but the dy-nasty that is actually reigning is more devoted to the Russians than the people. The  Oubikhs  and the  Tchigates  form the confederation of the  Chapsoukhs,  and are two warrior tribes that inhabit along the coast of the  Pont-Euxine.  n e y  have, as will be stated in another place, repulsed successfully many attacks of the Russians, and seized upon several of their forts. 

The  Ossetians  are the Jas of  Nestor,  or the  Jazyges  of the Russians, therefore a Sclavonian  race, and according to the Germans, the descendants of the  Alani,  who, them-selves, were a mixed nation and not a German one. Count  Potocki  pretends that they are the  OssiZians 

of  Ptolemy,  who, driven  from  the  Don  by  the  Chosars, 

came to settle in the passage of Dariel. The learned Lelevell* says  :-

# r

# i "Many  Orientalists  speak of the  tomn  Allania;  however their statements do not sufficiently indicate its site, which 

# %

5 - is beyond the  defile.  The  defile,  Allan  Babaflan,  is  evi- 

> c

dently the same as the defile Dariel, which the Armenians  

> .t 2
> E.

call  T o m  Alanats,  that is,  Door  of the Allans.  Massoudi 

i 

> 1:.

gave a description of it  towards  the year 947  ; Edrisi,  in 

# !Y  1154,  mentions it among numerous defiles  ; AIboufeda,  in   

> I>
> '1

1331,  distinguidhes  it from others as being the greatest of 

dl  passages. The  town  of  Allania  must therefore have been situated  to,the  north, at the issue of the defile, on the  

> &

plains of the Terek. The Allans called themselves  Os,  As, 

# 5"  and obtained the name of Allans, from the  town  of  Allm,  

> I

# - " Geozraphy  of the  3iiddIe~age  B ~ u s ~ e l s , 158%  T. III.,  p. 200. 84  TIIE  CACCASUS.  ETHNOGRAPHY.  85 

which mas very ancient, as in fact the word  Allalas  was 

k n o ~ n to antiquity  ." 

I f the Ossetians, in the time of  the  Empress Elizabeth, 

offered  resistance to their being  a a d e  Christians, it is not so in our own days; for the number of  comerts  is greater than that of the population. This is owing to the fact that, allured by the rewards which the Russian Government 

offered,  and which consisted of a silver rouble, a silver cross, and some garments, the same individual made it a trade to be converted several  times  and  at  different  places ;

an occurrence which mas facilitated by the carelessness with which Russian priests keep their registers.  But 

though several times converted to Christianity, they are not the less good Mussulmans. At the foot of the Elbrous, on the river  Ingur,  and along a space of near forty geographical miles, is situated 

Souanethia,  a territory where the winter lasts near nine months. The  Souanians,  the inhabitants of the above territory, are tall, robust, and can bear severe privations and long marches. They are industrious and peaceful if the country yields them the necessaries of life;  othermise,  they plunder or sell their children for slavery.  

> \

As among the  Abhasians,  Christian temples are found on their territory  ; and it is pretended that they were built by Queen Thamar, of Georgia. However, the Souanes have but little religion, if any at all. Quite different from the  Lesghians,  the Souanians care-

fully  hide their wives ; but polygamy is not allowed among them ; and any  man  is obliged to marry the widow of his brother. The  lngoushes  are also Pagan, though traces of ancient Christianity are to be found in their habits. In fact, they keep Sunday and other feasts of the Greek Church. They believe in the immortality of the soul, and in a future life; whilst the Souanes believe in the migration of souls. Kabardah is divided by the  Tereli  into little and great Kabardah. That country, being of an easy access to the Russians, is subjected to them; but the inhabitants are nevertheless, at heart, good  Mussulrnans.  Their manners are in  a great measure similar to  those  of the  Adighe  ; and their princes are of an Arabian origin. The Czars, as we hare already stated, considered themselves, in the age of Louis  XIV.,  as the masters of Kabardah. 

Th'e  Karatchai,  the  RaEkar,  and the  Rizingli,  acknom-ledge that they are the descendants of the Magyars. However, their language differs as much from the Hun-garian as i t does from the Ossetian. But leaving aside the question, which of the two nations has borrowed its number from the other, or if one has lost its primitive language, retaining  only  the names of the numbers, such arevolution, if it had taken place, mould rather prove in favour of a common origin. With regard to their phy  sicaI  likeness with the Magyars, it is also found among the Cossacks of the line. The Georgians, in German  Georgier,  and in Russian 

Grusini,  do not derive their name from St. Gregory, as it. has been foolishly pretended by some writers, but from 

Ghordistan  or  Ghuria. 

I t has been remarked that  Islamism  could never be established among them, on account of their peculiar fond-ness for pork and wine. However the Georgians of the district of  Akhaltzik,  in Armenia, have been compelled to embrace Islamism, whilst 86  THE  CAUCASUS. the Armenians themselves are allowed  full  freedom in matters of religion. The Georgians are an agricultural  people,  and their ploughs are drawn by as many as ten or twelve oxen or buffaloes  ; but their dwellings are wretched hovels, little better than dens. They bring up silk-worms at home, and keep numerous flocks. Their bridges, on the Kour, are constructed according to the primitive system that pre-vailed in the time of Cambyses. Skins, the same that are used as leathern bottles to carry wine, are sewed, inflated, and carefully shut. Then they are tied one to the other, so as to cover the water from one bank to the other. Over them planks are fitted up. Such are their bridges. 

- The Georgians soon reach maturity and old age; and their daughters marry and have children even when they are only eleven years old. The Georgian costume partakes of both the  Persian  and the Circassian. The upper garment  is  called kaba, and covers the  arhokuh,  and the  oharwnli,  which have become fashionable in Russia. The shirts are in silk or cotton. The Georgians dye their hair, and they display, in that art, a  skill  equal to that of the Persians. The Immeretians dram their name from ancient Iberia, which country mas probably called so from  w i r  or your, a

dep-mination  which the Armenians and the Georgians gave to the Hebrews who settled in that part of the  world. 

The Immeretians, as  well  as the Georgians and  Mingre-

lians,  belong to the  Kartmell  race,*  though  their languages 

me  distinguished by a striking dissimilarity. The  Imme-

retians  wear the Persian costume, except the cap, which is a piece of cloth, fitted up for the purpose, sometimes 

* Kartwell,  from  t h e  Kartos,  thc  son  of  Torgnmoa. 

embroidered  with silver, and  mhich  is tied  mith  a string round the chin. This cap, which has the shape of a vine leaf,  covers  only the surface of the head, and is no protec-tion against the cold. However, its inefficiency is supplied by long and thick hair, which is dyed red, whilst moustaches are dyed  black. 

The Immeretians cultivate the vine, and are still more fond of mine than the  ~eorgians.  Their libations take place amidst sacred hymns, and no other  ldnd  of singing is  known  to them. Their dancing, like  Circassian  and Persian dancing, consists not of steps but of gestures and simple motions of the feet. Though Christians, they worship ancient idols, and make sacrifices of animals, especially on the tombs of the dead. The Chevalier de Gamba, who resided a long time at Kutais, pretends that he mas the first who introduced wheat into that country. Before that  time  only  Turkish  wheat 

was  known.  In our own days the Immeretians make  mith 

kukarom  as bad  muftins  as those which are eaten in 

Daghestan. 

' h e  word  21.9iny.relia  is derived from the name of the river Egressi,  cornmody  called  Engour. Formerly that appellation was only given to a single district; but the Russians have extended it to Litchekoam, and to Odichi, the name by which the natives designated their country. I t was the Colchis of the ancients. Ruins are still found there, but they no longer draw gold sand from the rivers. The country is poor, and produces only a kind of wood, called  tchinai,,which  is highly esteemed, very hard, and excellent for the construction of ships  ; but the inha-bitants could derive more advantage from it than they do. The princes of that country, who are called Dadiani, 88  T I I E  CAUCASUS. devoted to the service of Russia, bestow hardly any thought on the happiness of their subjects,  who  are vegetating in the ignorance of even the most common necessaries of life. However, the country has made some progress since the time of  Chardin,  who did not find there the use of coin. With regard to the Armenians the two provinces of 

Erivan  and Nachitchewaer were, in 1828, united to Russia, by the treaty of Turkmantchai, and are now included in the administration of the Caucasus. The  Arase  forms the southern limit of Russian Armenia, which contains a popu-lation of 165,000 inhabitants. The Armenians have acquired a great name for their commercial skill. I n fact, not only do they carry on all the trade in a great part of the Caucasus, but they have also important settlements of that kind throughout all Russia, where their number may be estimated at 400,000. 

A Turkish proverb says that no less than a Copt, two Greeks, and three Jews, are required to deceive an Arme-nian. But it is also pretended that a Genevese is a match for two Jews. Peter I., consulted whether the Jews were to be allowed to corns to Russia, answered : "Let them come, and con-tend with  ~y  people." It is also reported that a king of England gave the same answer. W e shall have another opportunity of  speaking  again of this last acquisition of Russia, who certainly does not in-tend  c<  confine herself to that part of Armenia. THE TARTARS. 

Klaproth and Bodenstedt protest against the too large denomination of Tartars which is given by the Russians to the Turkish races of the  Caucasuu,  and will have  they  are 

Turkoumans  or Turks. But  what  are the  Turks  themselves, if not Tartars ? A fact confirmed by  Mehemet-Ali,  who 

said to a friend of mine : " The Turkish  language,  as being Tartar, is only beautiful because it borrowed the beauties of the Arabian and Persian languages." I n fact the Turkish language is only the Tartar enriched  ;

as the Turk himself is only a Tartar improved by  Circassian 

blood. 

A Tartar understands a Turk and vice versa  ; but there is no writing in the Tartar language, whilst there is awritten Turkish language which is spoken and esteemed by several Tartars of the Caucasus. The Nogais settled in the Caucasus are issued from pure Tartar blood. Their name is derived from Nogai, a de-scendant of Zengis-khan, who, towards the latter part of the thirteenth century, founded a powerful empire on the north  and  east of the sea' of  Azov.  H e afterwards waged war against the  Circassians,  with the assistance of the Russians of  Tmoutorakan,  who  acknowledged  his su-premacy. The  Kumans,  themselves,  who  inhabited the Don* before the formation of the Kiptchak horde, mere Tartars.? After the conquest of Astrakhan, in 1557, a part of the Nogai proceeded to the Caucasus, drove away the  Circas-

sians  and settled along Kouban, under the name of the 

# "Black Nogais." When Crimea passed, in 1771, under the Russian domination, other Tartars came to join their coun-trymen of the Kouban  ; the population is now about 70,000.                       

> The mouths of that river have for a time remained in the possession of the Allani.'
> fSee Rubmquis, edition of the Geographical Society of Paris," 1839.
> N

90  T U E  CAUCASUS. ETBNOGRAPHY.  91

The  Konmikls  are found in  Daghestan.  A populous and commercial aoul called Andri, is the chief place of the country. The Russians have erected near  that  borough, the fortress  Venzapnaia.  There are about 20,000  Konmiks, 

and  their  country reaches to the Shamhalat* of Tarkou. The chiefs of both territories are in the service of Russia. THE COSSACKS. The first five  Stanitzas  of the  Grebenslry  Cossacks were, in 1711, established by Peter I, along the Terek, under the names of the  old  and new  Gladka,  of  Kourdoukoa~a, 

Stchedrin and  Tchermlennaia.  I n the following year, Peter founded, on the  Soulak,  the fort of the Holy  Crdss, 

which was razed in consequence of the treaty of Belgrade, and whose garrison mas transferred to  Kislair.  Afterwards, Cossacks of the Don, a family from each  Stanitza,  and therefore called family Cossacks  (Semeiny),  were settled on the Terek. I n 1770,  Cossaclrs  of the  Volga  were also transferred, and they took the name of Cossacks of  Mosdok,  and were established between that town and Tchervlernaia. It was after the treaty of Kutchuk-Kainardshi that the fortresses of  Georgievslr,  Ekaterinograd,  Stavropol,  Moscov, and Donsk were raised, and peopled  with  Cossacks of the Volga. But, in 1794, the line of the  Kouban  mas  ~xtended from 

Georgiersk  to the redoubt Nedreman, and occupied by six 

new  stanitzas. I n the year 1798, the line of the Malka was covered with redoubts; in 1805, the Cossacks, called 

> --

little Russian,. peopled four new  stanitzas,  from  Oustla-

binslr  to Kavkask. Then, in  1833,  two  regiments of Cos-sacks of Ukraine, out of the four which the nobility of that country had equipped at its  own  expense for the campaign of Poland, were established on the  h e ,  and 

thirty-two  villagers  became Cossacks of line. Finally, in 1837, 10,830 men mere added to them.  Now  there are 

no  less than 40,000 Cossacks, a  sixth  of whom follows the operations of the army. These Cossacks have adopted the Circassian costume and the kind of  warfare  of the  Tcher-

kesses; in consequence of which, the mountaineers dread them more than they do the regular Russian troops. I t is near Kisplovodsk, that me find the prosperous colony of  Karas,  founded by Paterson. I t was in the origin com-posed of Scotsmen, but nom consists entirely of Germans. 

&GYARI.-T~~S  word evidently indicates that it mas aHungarian colony ; but even the ruins of that  town,  which, according to Klaproth, mas constructed by  Srabs,*  have entirely disappeared. The  Russiar  Government employed them in the construction of the fort Ekaterinodar. At a distance of  twenty-five  versts from  Olou-Magyari, 

we find  Kiss-Magjari  or  Burgund-Magyar,  which  xyas 

founded by General  Skarjynski,  formerIy  Goveruor 

of Astrakhan. H e gave it the name  of  Burgund,  on account of the mine which he grew there, and which has the taste of Chambertin, a mine of Burgundy, as is attested by the  Empress  Catherine  11,  who ordered the General to call the property, of which she had made him a present,       

> Magyar, in the hrabian language, means an emigrant.

## * Shamhal  is an Arabian dignity of t h e second order. 92  THE  CAUCASUS. by that  name.  And we must add, that the vine-stock had in fact been brought there from Burgundy. 

Vladimirovlra,  formerly a property of  Syalier,  belongs now to Mr. Rebrof, and is very prosperous; and in  1835,* 

it was able to repulse an attack of the  Lesghians.  M. Rebrof makes Champagne wine there, which  i~-~inferior 

to the ordinary mine of his vineyards. The German colonies of the Trans-Caucasus mere origi-nated in 1818, and are composed of  Suabian  emigrants, whose number is now four thousand. Helenendorf is the most populous, but is not prosperous. 

Katherinerfeld  answers better; and the  nearest  to  Tiflis 

is New  Tias. 

The Germans bring butter and the best vegetables to the market  af  Tiflis. Their countrymen of America may envy them the wine which they successfully grow, but not the Russian knout, to which they are subjected, though they are free from being enlisted.  ' 

> Travelr

in  the Steppes, by  Hornmaire-de-Hell. 

> EXPLORATIONS.

# CHAPTER  VII.  

> EXPLORATION

OF T H E CAUCASUS. The March of the Ark-Prometheus-The Amazons of  Herodotus-Expedi-              

> tion of the Argonauts-That of Alexander the Great-Ilithridates-Strabo
> -Byzantins-Arabian Authors and their K n o ~ l e d g e of the Caucasus-Russian Princes-Invasions of the MongoIs-Zengis-khan-Timour

- 

> Miasionaries-Genoes-Torks on the Caucasus.

TEE  country watered by the  Tiegis  and the Euphrates does not yet belong to Russia ; the cradle of  humanity  has 

not yet been seized upon by the  Moscovite  empire; but the territory  where  tradition places the scenes of the  ffood 

is  now  under Russian domination. 

Erivan,  the capital of Russian Armenia,  means,  in that  -

language, altogether ; for  Noah's ark  mas  seen there entire. 

Nakhitchewan  signifies the half, and  Edmiadzin,  a quarter. So those different denominations for different  localities 

indicate the march of the ark. Before reaching the Ararat, the ark is said to have rested on Elbrous; and the inhabitants of that country pretend it was while passing that it formed the two peaks that are still seen there. The Greek fable has placed on the Caucasus one of its most important events. It tied Prometheus - guilty of having stolen the fire of heaven-on a rock of that chain, 94  T H E CAUCASUS. 

That fable still exists in the memory of the inhabitants, who relate it with slight modifications. Herodotus places the Amazons in the Caucasus. The Scythians, as he pretended, being unable to conquer the Amazons, came at last to terms  with  them, and united through ; marriage, the  Sarmatians  mere the offspring of that union. I n this,  popular  tradition agrees with the narrative of "the father of history," and relates that the 

Circassians  first inhabited  Tauris,  and that having come to the Caucasus, and being unable to subdue the Amazons, they married them. The manners of Circassian women corroborate this tra-dition; as in fact they share with their husbands the toils of war.  Sounitinn  women are above all remarkable for 

their  great courage; and at the taking of Akhoulgo, the Russians saw 400 women who, after having achieved prodigies of  valour,  preferred death rather than surrender, and threw themselves headlong from a precipice. Herodotus had a full knowledge of the Caspian Sea  ; he indicated accurately its length and breadth, and stated that it was an isolated sea; whilst later, Ptolemy propogated 

the  error  that it was a lake connected mith other waters. Colchis was the Mingrelia of our  own  day; i t was there the golden fleece existed, for the possession of which the Greeks undertook two expeditions, that of  Phryxus  and that of the Argonauts.' The first settled near  Kingitetes,  who resided at  Kytais  (Kuthais, the actual capital of  31ingrelia). 

His children welcomed Jason, the leader of the Argonauts, who with  his  companions had landed at the mouth of the Phasis, and crossed the territory of Circe.  According  to 

## * Formerly gold waa washed with a fleece or wool. EXPLORATIONS.  95 

Herodotus, Jason carried off the treasures of  B t e s  and  his 

daughter  JIedea,  who mas vainly claimed back from the Greeks; it mas to avenge that injury that Darius  Hystarpus 

became hostile to Greece. The country of Circe mas  known  to Homer; for he says 

# " that  Ulysses  resided a long time  mith  Queen Kirke, the sister of  Ates,  i n the island of  B a ,  on the shore of the Phasis." Alexander, of Macedonia, on his way to India, subdued Georgia (Iberia) ; and  Mtzkhetha  was the only town which offered him a long and heroic resistance. Having taken it, he ordered the forts to be  rased  down  to the ground, all the children to be killed up to fifteen years of age, and the inhabitants to be carried  away  prisoners. He appointed his lieutenant,  Ason,  governor of Iberia.  However,  Pharnarez, 

a descendant of the  exterminated  kings, having found a treasure,  took  arms against  Ason,  kilIed  him, and thus reestablished the independence of his country.* Mithridates, the king of Pontus and  Bosp~orus, took possession of  CoIchis  and Abkhasia, and had for tributaries 

Atag  King of Iberia and Orazes king of Albania.  Tig-

ranes  King of Armenia and his son-in-law assisted him in his war against the Romans. Defeated by Pompey, 

sixty-five  years before the Christian era, he fled to the mountains of the Caucasus ; whilst Athalus, governor of Colchis, adorned the triumph of Pompey. The Romans established their domination over Georgia and Colchis  ; but they valued them very little, and were 

## * Vakhtang  T,  King of  Karthli  (1103  to  1721).  "The  Histmy  of Geor-gia, compiled according to the Chronicies." There is, at the library of the             

> 'atican, a Georgian copy of it. The work was translated into Russian by aGeorgian ;and Klaproth has giren extracts of it in German.

satisfied with appointing their Kings chosen among the natives. That order of things lasted till the  damnfall  of the 

Roman  Empire. The apostles, Simon the Canaanite, and Andrew preached Christianity in Abkhasia and  Colchis,  but with very little success it appears. As Strabo had an uncle  (Moaphernes)  ; who was one of the prefects of  BIithridates  ; that circumstance assisted him in obtaining accurate knowledge concerning the Caucasus.  

> "

Iberia," says he  " is inhabited by four different castes of men. The first,  which  supplies kings  ; the second, that of priests; the third, that of Pagans and husbandmen; and the fourth, of servants." Strabo speaks of the  Kerketze,  or  Terutz,  who  are the actual  Circassians  ; of the  S oanes, of  Leg=,  who are now known under the name of  Lesghes;  and of the  Aorsi~ 

who  probably  are the Avares of the Caspian Sea.  (Aior 

signifies man in the Scythian language.) The Albanians mere the  neighbours  of these  two  last tribes. The  Aord  traded with India, and assisted the Romans to destroy the Siraces. The river Kuban is called  Hypanis  by Strabo, who, as Herodotus, places there the  Sindi. 

Moreover, Strabo calls the chain of mountains  Koh-chaf  

> or

Ckasp {Caspian). The  Pylse  Caspiae  of  P l i ~ i u s are the passage of Dariel, which Ptolemy calls Sarmatian portals. Some vestiges of a wall have in fact led to the supposition that a portal might have existed in that place, so easy to shut and defend that a single  man  could  resist a whole  army. 

The ancients knew the river  Kour,  under the name of 

Cyrus  ; Koissu, under that of  Cnssius  ; and Shorak, under that of  Apsarus.  The actual  Rhiou  was  the  Glaucus  of Strabo, the  Surium  of  Plinius,  tlnd  the Rheone of Proco-

pius.  With regard to the  Phasis  of the ancients, it is  now 

called  Kvirila. 

The wine of Kahetia mas  kuomn  by Strabo, who praised it. The Romans believed that the  .Cprus  and the Rhion were navigable, and that the trade of the  Indies  mas car-ried on that way. But it is certain that those rivers  couid 

only bear ships at  their  mouth. Nothing could be more scanty than the documents of the Byzantine writers concerning the Caucasus. However, Constantine  knew  the Abkhases and the  Zilches.  Proco-

pius  gave the name of Goths to the  Allans  ; and Eustathius said that their name signified mountaineers. 

Massoudi,  Ebn-Haoucal,  and  Iacout  are our principal Arabian sources  ; but the Arabs, being inclined to exagge-ration and credulity, must be read with caution. In order to express their notions in  few  words, we will state that they call the Caucasus  Cabokh,  a word which resembles very much the  K'habgokh  of the Armenians, and which is  also  found in  Eabmdha,  which  the Circassians designate under the name of Aghto-Cabac. The province of  Shirvan  is so called after the name of the Persian prince, whom king Nouschirevan invested with its administration. Cosroe confirmed  several  Cauca-sian princes in their possessions  aud  gave them the title of Shah : Herarzanshah,  Filanshah,  Tabarseranshah,  Kharis-

shanshah,  and Transhah, were  the'princes  of  Nodi  and Z erengueran. 

Kharisshanshah  was the Prince of the  Lekzes.  I n the 

county  of the  Leighes,  the Arabs have mentioned two towns, Takhar and  Sinms,  saying that the inhabitants  of  them 

> N

98  TBE  CAUCASUS. fed on  Iult,  which  resembles barley, but has the taste  of 

wheat. Some of the Lekzes were called  Doudanis. 

Iran, a province of the Caucasus,  was  betrreen  Der-

bend and Shirvan. 

Arran,  on the contrary, designated the  count^  which extends from the  Aras  to Derbend; but  now  it  only 

designates the country situated between the Aras and the Kour. The Caspian  Sea  mas, at that time,  called  the Sea of the Khazars; but it bore  also  the name of Shirvan, of Guilan, and of other provinces i n its  neighbornhood. 

Derbend was called the  t o m  of the gates:  El-bah  el 

Ewab,*  the  town with the iron gates. 

Kesora  Nouschirevan, in order to protect his states against the invasion of the  Khazares,  of the Allani, and other barbarians, is said to have constructed through the Caucasus a mall forty  forsensks  long, and provided  with 

iron gates and towers at the places which were crossed by roads. There were twelve, and the guarding them was entrusted to various tribes. Actual Georgia mas  Djorzan,  of which the Arabs  took 

possession in the year  650;  and Tiflis remained in their 

pomer  until the year 514,  when  the  Gourdjes  seized upon it, and formed  Gourdjistan  or Georgia. The  Gourdges  were considered as Khazares. The Arabs were acquainted with the  ilbkhases,  who 

mere Christians,  and'tributaries  to the  Allani  and the 

Rhalifs. 

The  Savortians  on the river Beradje, called now  Bort-

schale, the  Somtakhas  or Somkhites, and the  Sanarians 

## * Bab,  in Arabian, means door,  &ie,  defile.  

> EXPLORATIONS.

99 

are  Axmenian  tribes; the first having given their name to formidable  war  axes. I n general, the Georgians give the  name  of  Soruelil~is to the Armenians. With regard to the  Sanariacs,  they inhabited the country of Dzanar. The Arabs attributed to them an Arabian origin, but 

Ptolemy  had heard of them before the time of the con-quests of  i\.lahomet's  follon.ers. 

The  Shekinis  inhabited on the  Kur;  and  the  town of 

Cabalah,  in the district of Shirvnn, was a  haunt  of robbers. The present town of  Tarkou  was formerly called  Saman-

der, and under that  name  was the capital of the Khazares. Itil* is  now  invested with  that  title. But as that country is not included in the Caucasus, we 

tliink  it will be sufficient to refer to  Ibn-Eazan,  and to the 

work  of  Ur.  Fraehn,  here  interesting details concerning that people  will  be found. 

However,  as the Chazars have played a great part on the Kur and the  Arases  have occupied Armenia, and waged sanguinary mars against the Arabs and the Persians, me think it proper to state that their kings reigned but did not govern. The government  was  in the hands of a Regent,  who  himself designated the King's successor. The court mas Israelite; however, there were among. the Chazars  as  many  Mussulmaw  as Pagans and Chris, 

tiam. 

Zilan  was a  Chozarean  town, but the title of  Zilanshah 

belonged to the  king  of Serir. 

## * Itil,in the Turkish  Imguage,  a river, was particularly the name of the Volga, which mas called  Oulong-ltil,  or the large river. A t the same time, it  w-3 d s o  the  residerice  of  the  Khan of the  Khazars,  situated  at seven        

> d q s ' jou~ne;. from the lnouth of the river.

100  T H E  CAUCAGUB.  EXPLORATIONS.  101 

Near Serir  was  situated the country called  Zirhgui-

ran, a word  which, in Persian,  means  manufacturers of coats of mail. 

Reineggs  recognizes their  descendzl.nts  in the  Courch-

schis,  excellent  arrnourers,  who  pretend to be of an European  origin.* 

On the north of  Serir  was  the dwelling of the  Goumiks, 

the actual  Koumikeq  who were Jews till the eighteenth 

century. 

The capital of the Allani mas called  BIagar,  and their king kept an army of 30,000 horsemen. The Caschakis are the inhabitants of  the  Casatchia  of 

Constanti~ie  Porphyro-gonetes,  or the Tcherkesses, so properly called. The Arabs admired their beauty, and praised the tala, a kind  of  liuen  which the Caschakis ma-nufactured, and a garment of which cost as many as ten dinars. Oleg, a Russian prince, forbade the Severians and the Radimitchians, Sclavonic tribes, to pay tribute to  the  Cho-

zars.  Sviatosla  made, in 965, war against the Chozarves, took from them Belaia-vess,  mhich  had  been constructed hy Greek engineers, and sacked  Semender.t 

A short time after, the Russians seized upon  Taman,  or Tamatarga, a Chazar town on the Bosphorus, mhich they called  Tmoutorolian.  I n 1022,  Mstislar  waged  n7ar against the  Cassoks  (Caschaki), and in 1023 he rendered them his tributaries. Afterwards the same Cassoks fought under his standard  agaiust  the great  Duke  Jaroslav,  his brother. I n 1222 the Mongols, for the first time, made an  irrup-

# * Reineggs.  Besh~eibung dej  Kaucasus,  p. 107, s.  f. 

t Ebu-Haucal  X a n .  of  Leyden,--p.  145. 

tion  on the Caucasus, and one of the chiefs of  Zengiskhan's 

army received the submission of the Prince of Georgia, 

who  resided in Tauris  ; and the plain of  IIoughan  became the habitual theatre of the  Xongols'  campaigns.  RIoreover, 

another lieutenant of the Khan, called Djoutchi, passed over the Caucasus by going along the  defile  of Derbend, and subdued the  Allani. 

In the following  ccntury,  another mighty warrior arose among the  Xongols;  in 1386, Timour,  whose  name means iron, received in the plain of Karabagh the  submission  of 

the  prince of Georgia, who  was  allowed to remain on his throne only because he renounced Christianity. The prince of Shirvan brought him nine times nine presents, nine being a sacred number with the  IIongols. 

Taherten,  prince of Armenia, dared to resist him, and for the first time, after a siege of nineteen days, the fortress of Van fell  into  the hands of the Mongols. Its brave defenders were precipitated into an abyss, and its walls mere overthrown-a laborious task in which 10,000 men were engaged. I n 1399, Timour, on his return from Persia, marched against Melek  Gourgin,  the Yrince of Georgia,  who  had refused  to  deliver up to him the fugitive Prince of Bagdad. Melek  Gourgin  had fortified himself in the mountains; and to conquer him, Timour resorted to the same means 

which  he  had  successfully  employed  in order to effectuate his passage through the chain of  India.  H e ordered cords one hundred and fifty metres long to be made, and to be fastened to baskets in which soldiers mere placed, and by which they were descended near the asylum of the Circassians. Then the  Monglian  soldiers, either  with  their arrows drove the Circassians  away,  or set their places of 10.2  T H E  CAUCASUS. refuge on fire.*  Timour,  haling  thus subdued the mountaineers, had all the forts rased and the inhabitants killed. According to Strabo and the Arabs, who wrote after him, there are in the Caucasus seventy-two  difl'erent  tribes, as many as are  contained  in Russia, the state which offers the greatest variety of inhabitants. I n our  own  rlrtys,  the number of Circassian tribes is still very great, and the fact is only accounted for through the supposition that the mountains of the Caucasus served as a refuge to the remains of all the different migrations. Thus it is also probable that a remnant of the Crusaders who were beaten back, sheltered themselves in the Caucasus  ;

and the immense quantity of arms, which at that period 

hegan  to be  fonnd  among the Circassians, would corroborate the fact, unless it were pretended that the mountaineers brought them from the  Ottomans. 

The Christian missionaries  who  at different periods re-paired to the Mongols, the Chinese, and the  Hindoos  have 

passed through  diKerent  parts of the Caucasus, and have transmitted to us the knowledge they have gathered ; but the information received through them is very inferior to that derived from local surveys and from the Armenian and  Georgian  chronicles. However, the Genoese having established colonies in Crimea,  extended,  through Astrakhan, their trade with Persia, and worked for their  o m  account the mines of 

3lingrelia.  But, in 1475,  Caffa  fell into the power of the Turks, and thus disappeared the  connesion  between the 

East  and Europe.                  

> Cherefeddin. Hist. de Timur Bay. Translated into Freoch, by Petit
> de la Croix. L. I, cll. 8, p. 2-12.
> EXPLORhTIOSS.

103 

w e  are to mention  here  the  relations  of  Guillaume  de 

Rubrupuis,  of  Arcuungelo  Lumberti,  on  Mingrelia,  of 

Georp  Izteriuno,  of Genoa ; and the  ~ o r k of  the  Roman 

Aldo  EoWanzctio, delta  vitta  de  Zychi,  Venetia,  1853. The domination of the  T u r b  and of the Persians in the Caucasus did not supply Europe with any  knowledge  con-cerning that country.  We  will  devote a private chapter to the progress of the Russians: and  now  me have to 

mcntion  the travels  which  have thrown light on  that 

country. We place in the first rank  J.  A. Guldenstadt,  Reisen 

durch  Russland  und  irn  Caucasischen Gebirge.  Heraus-

gegeben von  Pallas,  I1  Theile, Petersburg,  1787-1 791. 

Dr.  J.  Reineggs'  Allgemeine  historish geographische Beschreibung des Caucasus,  I1  Theile a Petersburg. 

Pallas.  Reise nach den sudlichen Statt haltershaften 

Russlands,  I1  Bde, St. Peters. 

Klaproth.  Reise am  Kaukasus,  11,  St. Peters. 

Ct.  Potocki. Voyages dans les steppes  rl'hstralihan  et 

du  Caucase public's par Klapoth. 

Taitbout  de Marigny. Voyages  2 la Mer  Noire,  dans 

l'ouvrage  de Potocki. Bell. Two years residence among the Circassians. Spencer. Travels in the Western Caucasus, London, 1838, 2 vols. 

Dubois  de  Montpereulc.  Voyage au tour du Caucase, 3

vols,  Paris,  1238. 

9.  C.  Besse. Voyage en  ~ r i r n i e , au Caucase, etc. Paris, 

1838. 

Karl  Koch.  Reise  nach  dem  Kaulrasisehen  Isthmus, in dea  Iahren,  1836-38. Stuttgard, 1843. 

Eommaire  de  Hell.  Voyage  dam  Ies steppes du midi de la Russie, 3 vols., Paris, 1844. 104  T H E  caccasts. 

Moritz  Wagner. Der  Kaukavus  und 

Kouaken,  Leipzig, 1850, 2nd edition. 

Ditto.  Reise nach  Kolchis. 

Fr.  Bodenstedt.  Die  ~ o l k e r des  Kaukae 

G .  L.  Ditson.  Circassia, or a Tour  to 

London, 1850. das 

;us. 

the Land der Fft.,  1849. 

Caucasus, 

> PRODUCTIOXS.

# CgAPTER  V I I I . PRODUCTIOXS  O F  THE CAUCASUS.   

> Mineral Xingdonl

- Togetable  Kingdom -Animal Kingdom -Climate-   

> Industry of the Inhabitants.

OPINIONS concerning the existence of gold in the  mom, 

t a b s  and rivers of the Caucasus are divided. Some believe in it, and others are incredulous on the subject. W e are rather inclined to side for the affirmative. Besides, it is certain that the ancients found gold there; but they had neither our knowledge, nor our  means  of  working  mines. Thus in Spain, the mines  which  mere abandoned by the 

Carthagenians,  are  now  successfully worked by Europeans ;

and English machines produce those results far superior to those which the slaves and the prisoners of mar of the Romans could obtain for their masters. The Greek fable pretends that the gold sand of  Colchis, 

the actual  Mingrelia,  were guarded by ants, who inflicted a mortal sting on those  who  ventured  to collect that sand. The ants of the fable might have been  real  hyenas, which formed their dens with auriferous earth, and defended any approach to them with their well  known  ferocity. Nor would it he improbable if some hunter, pursuing any of 

> 0

106 T H E CAUCASUS. those beasts, had at length discovered gold  ; for, it is well known that the discovery of the richest mines in Siberia was owing to a chance of that description. Hunters, it is said,  having  killed some  heath-cocits,  dis-covered particles of  gold  in their intestines ; therellpon, 

they returned to the place where those birds used  to  brood, and they found there gold. Such was the origin  of  the discovery of the richest mines in Siberia. With regard to the mines of  &Cingrelia,  they  have  been worked by Genoese, and at their own expense. But a fact which is not  to  be  overlooked is, that conti-nually and from different parts of the Caucasus, a kind of sand which has  the  appearance of gold, but which is  only 

catergold, is sent to Tiflis : however, a better chance may yet be expected. At eighty versts of  Tiflis  are found the copper mines of 

Alwersk,  and at twelve versts  from  that place those  of 

Shambludsk, which yield three hundred  puds;'  but the silver mines of Akhtal have been abandoned. The mountains of the Caucasus are of a volcanic nature; and  thokgh  the volcanoes have long been extinguished, we find on the  Kasbek,  for instance, Plutonic productions. Porphyry and granite form the nucleus of the chief summit. Sulphur is found in abundance at the foot of the  Elbrous  ;

and the Sounitians, who inhabit that country, elaborate it as well as saltpetre, and manufacture gunpowder, which they clandestinely sell to  the  Circassians,  who are at war with Russia.  1

No  salt  is  found  in the western part of the Caucasus, but a small quantity is gathered  near  Kisliar,  and in the 

neighbourhood  of the peninsula of Absheron. 

# * A pud has  40  lib. 

I t is the government that works out the rock salt of 

Koulp,  in the province of Armenia. The mineral  maters  of the Caucasus are more and more 

recognised  to be beneficial, and every  year  their reputation is increasing,  especially  the sulphur waters of Piatigorsk and the  sdine  waters of Kislovodsk. Already, before the arrival of the Russians, the indige-nous were in the habit of making use of them. They called them  Narzana,  that is, the spirit of heroes, from  Nar,  hero, and  Zana,  spirit. Having been driven away, the natives attempted to fill them up with stones, but the water has appeared again at a short distance, and the Russians have solidly established themselves there. So the same place, where, in the time of Catherine,  only  a few  wretched  hovels were seen,  now  is enlivened by a town which offers the pleasures, resources and  lmxuries  of  civilised  life;-we speak of Piatigorsk. There are also several  lalres  in Armenia,  the  water of which is very efficacious for certain complaints, but which is not fit for drinking. The Caucasus is, in general, one of the finest countries in the world. I t vies with Switzerland for the imposing majesty of its sites, and  with  Italy for the beauty of its climate. It no doubt will attract as many tourists as those two countries do, when mar has ceased to devastate it, and safety has succeeded the alarms from which even bathers 

zre  not free, and which imposes on travellers the necessity of having an escort on the most frequented  roads. 

The  Emperor  Nicholag  on visiting that country in 1837, exclaimed,-" I now understand better than ever the words in Genesis,-'God said, Let there be light, and there was light.'" I n fact, the sun shines on the Caucasus more 108 THE CAUCASUS. 

splendidly than it does in any other part of the Russian empire. I f there be a country  mherr  men  may  Fe  seized  with an 

entl~usiastic adomtion  of the Creator, it is undoubtedly the Caucasus ; yet, the indigenous worship mountains, and do not open their minds to the light of true religion. Vegetation especially  displays  there  extraordinary  rich-ness and beauty. Antediluvian moods inspire  you  mith aprofound respect for the greatness of that nature. There are, in Daghestan,  walnut  trees  under the foliage of  mhich 

two  companies of soldiers map encamp ; and  there  stands 

near  Erivan  a plane tree,  holIow  inside,  offering  a room, the dimension of  which  is seven feet and a half. People 

go there to play at cards or to  take  tea. The most beautiful and rare flowers enamel the  mea. 

dows, and the most esteemed  p!ants  g o w  along the rivers.* Wines and silk are  the  two  produc-cions  of the Caucasus which are destined to acquire the greatest  importance.  The province of  Kakhetia  produces  Aone  2,000,000  Verirost 

of  excellent  m i m ,  but  which  offers, and even in a higher degree, the same inconvenience as Spanish mines, except sherry. It is not put into casks or vases,  but  is kept and carried  in  skins,  which gives it the disagreeable taste of the naphtha with which they are laid over. But that process is necessary to preserve the mine. However the natives are not displeased with that taste. I t is said that those mines preserve from the gout; in this they are quite different from some Swiss mines, which give it. Imeratia is, perhaps, the native country of the vine; and 

stocks  are there of the size of the arm.            

> See the Memoire of the Academy of St. Petersburgh. Vol. viii.
> i. Pails.
> P R O D U C T I O N S .

109 

!I%e  cocoons of the silk-worms  rcnch  to a dimension of eight centimetres ; and experienced men of  Lombardy 

have been  enpged  to go there for the  purpose  of rearing 

silk-worms.* 

The Circassians  sow  Indian corn, cultivate rice, and make bread with  liuruss.  The product of their tobacco is valued at 15,000 puds ; and their exportation of madder amounts to 80,000 puds.  Excellent  saffron is gathered in the district of  Bak OU. The Greeks gave to the Caucasus the name of Hippicon, on  accourit  of the numerous horses produced in that coun-try. The Caucasian race of horses is much sought for by  the  Cossacks, and highly  valned  by Russians and Turks; it vies  with  the  Arabian for its  swiftrress  and the facility mith which i t bears fatigue, requiring at the same time but little food. The Circassians  are  very partial t o Caucasian horses, and treat them  ~ i t h a particular care. They never use  t h e n  for the plough;  oxen  are employed for that task, mhich they consider degrading for their war companions. They  feed  their horses on  vheat,  wllich  they 

grow  in a larger quantity than  an?  other grain. They make with mare's  milk  s favorite beverage called lioumys. Camels render great services to the Russian  army. 

They are  also  very useful to the Armenians, the  Geor-

gianu,  and the Persians of  Bakou.  There  is a species of white camels. Shamois are also found there; and the mountains Count  Brono-Bronslii  has discovered the art of crossing  &ilk-                                      

> worms, aprocess through which 11s obtains silk of a splendid whiteness. Baron M*je ~dorf bas mnde him bfiiant offers for the purpose oE
> securing for Russia the benefit of his invmtion. But the Polish emigrant
> h% refused through patriotism, and has offered hi4 secret t o the India
> Oompany.

110  T H E CAUCASUS. abound with he-goats  -,?, kids, as well as with a  kind  of 

izards  or gazelles. Circassian bulls have long and bent round horns;  they 

are  small,  but agile and strong. Mr.  Eichmald  pretends, and in the notes which he has added to the travels of Professor de Vilna,  Klaproth  con-firms the assertion that  there  are in the Caucasus mules issued from the crossing of  cows  with asses. Can such astatement be admitted? However, in order  not  to  contra-dict those two learned men, let  us  place  thhir  assertion among the-it is said. And me can safely do so, since the 

pretendell  fact has never been any mare repeated. The wild goat (rupi  capra)  or  Touri belongs  especiauy 

t o those mountains. I n order to escape hunters, it  preci-

pitntes  itself from the top of  roclcs  and  falls  on the tip of its horns, which, as well as its neck, are extraordinarily strong. Worked into a bowl, each horn holds a bottle of wine, which the indigenous often empty by a single draught. The wild goat is longer and bigger but not higher than a calf. The Circassians keep numerous flocks of sheep, the  ffesh 

of  which  is their principal food. With regard to the wool, i t is manufactured into pretty good cloth. Heaths, underwoods, and plains, are filled with exqui-site game,  buch  as pheasants and red partridges. The mountaineers,  who  are not acquainted  mith  small shot, and make use only of balls, are necessarily bad huntsmen, and 

often wonder at the nicety mith which the Russians hit the game. So high mountains quence of the ample prey. 

the vuftures and eagles, that find on those I .a dwelling worthy of them, are, i n  conse-

mountaineers being bad shots, left mith  

> P R O D U C T I O S S .

11 1

Black swans, which are erroneously believed to be  found 

but in Australia, exist, also in the Caucasus.  Carnivorous 

beast; are there likewise  rather  plentiful, especially jackals and wolves. Bears are often found eating the grapes of the inhabitants; and the Cossacks cut off their paws, with which they make an excellent dish. Hyenas are met in the naighbourhood of Persia; and even tigers advance from India as  far  as that re,' vlon. 

The Caspian Sea is rich in  fish,  especially in sturgeons and caviar. But the  Kouban  is the most plentiful of all rivers. Salmon trouts and ordinary trouts abound in the torrents of the mountains. The Cancasus offers very opposite climates. A winter of Sweden prevails on the summits,  mhiIst  a summer of Naples is enjoyed at  Bakou.  The spring is very short i n Georgia; and the climate of  Mingrelia  is pernicious even to the indigenous. While travelling you meet, on the same day, both the beginning of vegetation on the top of mountains, and the harvest in the valleys. The Georgians manufacture  silk  stuffs, mhich, under the name of  Tarnialama,  are highly valued, and which are employed to make morning  gowns  for  ladies,  and dressing gowns for rich men. The carpets, after the oriental taste, increase also i n sale i n proportion as they are made of a superior quality. The richest and best tempered arms are manufactured amongst the Circassians, and their daggers are held i n high estimation. T H E  TOWNS.  113 

# IX. 

ACCOHDINQ to the  Georgian  chronology, Tiflis mas built in  455  of the C bristian era, by King  Vakhtang  ; but it may be the  lmobel  or  Toubal  of Ezekiel. The old town  estended  along the right  bank  of the Kour, and mas ruined by  the  Persian Shah, Aga  hiohamed  Chan. 

The  new  tomn,  which  rises  on  the left bank, exists only since the arrival of the  Rusaians.  . .

Its name of  Tiphlissi  is derived from the hot springs and mineral waters which  flow  under a bridge, at the entrance of the tomn. Tiflis contains 30,000 inhabitants  ; it may be compared t o Prague for its general aspect, and to Cairo for the concourse and active life, of which it is the theatre. The streets are  ~ o tso fine as the places or squares. There are forty-three churches, but Georgian and Armenian cupolas are conic, and not round  Iike  those of Russian churches.-The palace of the general governor, in the  new  town, is a fine edifice ; it  was  built mith the arches of the ancient palace of the kings of Georgia; and the gardens which belong to it are, on Sundays, open to the public. The theatre, which was begun some time ago, is no doubt com-pleted. There is a. botanical garden, but it requires great improvement to deserve its name. The bazaar, which is arendezvous of a numeraus  population, composed of many races, is very attractive and excites curiosity in the highest degree  ; there you meet the Georgian  and  the Armenian, the  h e r e t i a n  and the Circassian, the Russian warrior and the Tartar, all  distingnished  from one another by their various costumes. There Europe and  Asia  intermix through commerce,  elbow  one another, exhibiting the striking contrast of their physiognomy and language. The 

Turk, the  Jew  who  speaks Spanish, and the Colon who talks German, carry on there,  also,  their commercial transactions. The artisans exercise their trade i n the street, by the side of the merchants who sell their products. The Georgian woman, mith black eyes, a curved nose and painted cheeks, with or without a Tchadra (veil) looks, seen at a distance, more  beautiful  than when surveyed  cIosely, 

on the terrace of a house than in the street. Mistress Pfeiffer, in her  " Journey Round the World," is right in saying that Persian harems are finer than Turkish harems, though peopled mith Circassian  womeu;  in fact, the Persian woman is, through her gracefulness, the French woman of the East;  whilst  the Circassian woman is, through the regularity of her features, to the utmost the 

Ital' ]an  woman. Russian morals have invaded Tiflis, and the virtue of Georgian women is not the better for it. We ought not to wonder if the conquests of Russian officers, in the society of  Tiflis,  were the real cause that prevents them from being 

> P

114 T H E  CAFCASOS.  T H E TOWNS.  115 

victorious in Daghcstan. A people of licentious morals is little  calculated  to subdue other nations. We must Here state that  wood  is not wanting in Georgia, but that it is scarce in Armenia and near Bakou. We are also going to make our readers acquainted with the method employed  by  the inhabitants of the Caucasus to warm 

themselves  ; stoves are hardly known to them, and  chimneys 

are not either very common. That being the case, a vase filled with ignited embers is placed under a table covered with a carpet ; the persons who enter the house sit round that table, and their feet are thus warmed by the heat which emanates from that warmer. As the shoes morn by the indigenous are very light, they are easily penetrated by heat  ; but that manner of expelling dampness is liable to engender  cornpIaints  pretty often. On the road from Tiflis to  Kutais  one finds first,  Mzcheta 

the ancient  capital  of Iberia, and nest,  GORI ; which was formerly a more important town than Tiflis. Gori is situated on the Liachwa, whose water is so much the more the object of praise, as that of the other rivers is bad  aud 

nnwholesome.  Suram  is the  Suriurn  of  Plinius. 

There is, concerning the women of Gori, a legend which circulates through the country, and which, perhaps, deserves to be related, as it gives an insight into the turn of mind peculiar to the inhabitants. "Allah" the legend says, "wishing to people his 

celestial'harern  with the most beautiful daughters of men, commissioned an  I m ~ m , who was a good judge of beauty, to bring him forty  of  the handsomest daughters of the earth. The Imam betook  himself  to Frankistan and to the country of the  Inglis,  where  having seized upon the daughter of the king, he carried her off. The English king 

pursued  him, but Allah, protecting his servant, threw dirt into the eyes of the pursuer, and stopped him. 

# " From England the Imam went to Germany, where he selected many pretty  girls  ; but having reached Gori, he fell in love with one of the beauties destined for the celestial harem, and stayed there  mith  all of them. Allah punished  mith  death the treachery of the Imam. With 

regnrd  to all those beautiful girls, they remained at Gor and contributed to the procreation of a handsome race."* 

KUTAIS is the chief town of Immeretia,  andis  situated on the  Rhion  ; it is remarkable for the  antiquities  which are found in its  neighbourhood,  but some of them owe their renown to supposition; for instance, in the convent of 

Gelati,  trat-ellcrs  are shown the sepulchre of King David, and half of the iron gate  which  that monarch is said, by the inhabitants, to have carried off from Derbend; that belief maintains its ground, though the Coptic inscription 

engraven  on the gate bears the date of the time of the Emir of  Tavin,  and states that it mas brought from  Ani,  the ancient capital of Armenia. That half gate is thirteen feet high and six broad. There is in  Mingrelia  no place which deserves the name of town. I n fact, Sukdide, already mentioned by Lamberti, 

which  is the winter residence,  and  Isalchino the summer dwelling of the princes, called new  Dadiani,  are merely poor villages. 

REDOUBT EALE is a bad sea port, which was opened in 1827. The Russian Government pays annually to  the 

princes of Mingrelia 2,300 silver rubles, for the privilege of trading there.  .        

> Tausend und ein Tag im Oricnt, v. Fr. Bodemteidt.

116 THE CAUCASUS. 

POTE, which is situated at the mouth of the Rhion, is not a better port than Redoubt  Kale. 

S U K H U ~ J ~ KALE,situated on the territory of  Abchasia,  i s better. Taken by the Russians in 1810, it mas, by the treaty of 1811, to be, with other parks, restored to Turkey. But as war assumed, in 1812, a more  favourable  aspect, counter-orders mere sent not to deliver up those ports, but they arrived too late,  escept  for  Sukhum  Kale, which was not restored, but detained by the Russians,  who  are still in possession of it. 

Isou~ssa, the capital of Abchasia, is of no importance. 

ANAPA was built by the Turks in 1784.  Six  years after that fort mas  stmrned  by General Bibikof, who was re-pulsed.  But  in  1791  General Goudovitch  tpok  it, after asiege of  six  weeks; and, on the 29th of April, 1807,  the 

Russian squadron, under the orders of  Traversey  and 

Pastoshkin,  carried it off in one single day. I t was after-wards retaken in 1809, and, for the last time, in  1828,  by Prince Menshikoff. Anapa, by the treaty of Adrianople became definitely the property of Russia. Under the Turks that place was the market for  Circassian  slaves. 

ERIVAN is the  capital  of Russian  Armenia.  Its  fortress was built by the Turks in 1582, and taken in 1604 by the Persians, who rendered it so strong that the Turks failed against it in 1615, and the Russians, under  Zizianof,  in 1804. However, in 1827,  Paskiewitch  was more fortunate, being favoured by the Armenians, who, on account of the conformity of their  relibion,  were desirous of passing uader the domination of  the  fiussians.  As a bullet  happened 

to fall on the cathedral,  where  the inhabitants had 

taltcn  rcfugc,  they  mcrc  scized  with  supcrstition,  rcfuserl  to 

defcnd  themselves  any  more, and surrendered.   

> THE TOWNS.

117 There were two Armenian churches in crockery ware, of different  colours  and of  extraordinary  beauty. The Russians converted one of them into a Russian church, and the other into an arsenal. The ancient harem of the Sardars of 

Erivan  has been transformed into barracks. And in the same place, where formerly odalisks rested, amidst perfumes and flowers, Russian soldiers emit the  odour  which is peculiar to them. The  tomn  itself is dirty and ill-built; but from the castle one obtains a  magnificent  sight of the surrounding country. There are in that castle very rich rooms, adorned with looking glasses, and the portraits of the Shahs of Persia. 

STAVROPOL, the  .capital  of the Cis-Caucasus, was founded in 1777; but it mas only in 1785 that it mas raised to the rank of a town. It stands on a healthy and high spot, which towers over the steeps, and protects the territory situated between  Kouma  and Kouban.  Two  fairs are, every year, held in that  town;  and the exchange of merchandise  

> I

which takes place is valued at nearly 2,000,000  sti. 

There is, near the tomn, aprison,  where  dl the evildoers of the province are sent ; and they are made to work in 

ope2  day, many of them being loaded with chains.  

> -

Stavoropol is situated on the river  Atchile,  and sur-rounded with Kalmucks,  nomade  Nogais, and Cossacks' 

Stanitzas.  The garden, which is a part of the hotel of the governor, owes its beauty to Geueral  Emmanuel.  That 

town is calculated to become important, but it is not yet so. The government of  Stavropol  is  comp&ed  of four dis-

tricts-Stavro201,  Piatigorsk,  Mosdok,  and Kisliar. 

MOSDOK, built in  1764,  on the frontiers of  Kabardah, 

contains 4,500 inhabitants, and is situated on the Terek. 118  T H E CAUCASUS. 

KISLIAR was built under the Empress Anna, at seventy versts from the Caspian Sea. Its name is derived from  an 

arm of the Terek, and means, in Tartar,  " a drowned girl.'' Kisliar contains 10,000 inhabitants, and its commerce is rather considerable. 

PIATIGORSII is known on account of its mineral waters, of 

which we shall speak in another place. 

GEORGIEVSK has lost its importance since 1822, when the seat of the government was transferred to  Starnopol,  and also since  Piatigorsk  has become the chief place of the district. Mosdok has also considerably lost since the time 

when  the highway of Teflis has begun to pass through S t avropol. 

BAKU, or  Badkou,  means  LLmountain of  the  wind;" in fact it is exposed to an unbearable north mind, and its climate is  generally  bad. That tomn contains 800 houses, 4,000 inhabitants, and a garrison of 400 soldiers.  Its 

district is composed of 35 villages. The fortress of Baku, which mas erected  by  Peter I., is pretty strong, and mas formerly mashed by the sea,  which 

has considerably diminished there. The port is good, and the  bazaar  finer than that of Derbend. The Tower of the Maids (Madchenthurm) is rather remarkable, and was built to oppose the incursions of the Truchmens of the eastern shore. The two shores of the  Caspim  Sea were formerly united  by  a neck of land which divided it into two  lakes, 

and went through the island of  Nargin  ; but, in our own days, the sea is very deep, at least around that island. It appears also that in ancient times there existed a town called  Shabah,  which has disappeared. 

Bakou  carries on a considerable trade with Persia, from mhich it receives silk-stuffs, carpets, and wines  of  old  Sha-  

> T H E TOWNY.

119 

machi.  Those wines resemble those of the south of  France 

of a superior quality; and their making deserves more 

skill  than is bestowed. Russian products are very dear at Baku, but fruit there is excessively cheap, Grapes are sold at a penny a pound; and a pail of wine is obtained for four shillings. There is a deficiency of vegetables ; and for  want  of meadows, milk food is scarce an  l of a bad  quality.  Naphtha is abundant in the  neighbowhood,  and the roofs of houses are laid over with it, but it does not  always  protect them against the 

perpetual  rain that falls in the spring. Naphtha is  also 

burned instead of candles, and its smell is disagreeable. 

As no  wheat  is sown, the  Tchuraki  make bad bread. At twelve versts from Baku, and on the peninsula of Absheron, there is an encampment of a tribe of fire-worshippers, mho are Indians. They keep a white-yellow fire issuing from under ground. I t is free from the in-convenience that belongs to naphtha, and appears to be carbonic gas  (Wasserstofgass) . Flames are seen  burning 

on the walls of  their  temple; and in the interior, beside alarge focus of fire, there are little flames mhich strew the ground floor. If atmospheric air is compressed, and fire brought into contact with it, an explosion, which  could 

blow up a hut, is produced. The Indians make use of awell to give that spectacle to visitors, and they produce aroaring noise.* 

DERBEND contains 1,800 houses and 26,000 inhabitants. 

## * Besides the  Ere-worshippers  of  Inclirt,  there is at Andi  n colony  of Persians who follow the same religious rite. They obtain fire through the rubbing of small sticks against  the  inside of a round hole in  two  pieces of wood  superpoked  one  orer  the  other.  'l'he  Persinns  call  fire  aghan;  the       

> Russians, ogone ;and the Arabs, nw.

120  T H E  C S U C I S C S . 

Its climate is  deadly  to  the  Russian garrison, which  every 

year loses the  half  of its personnel  througil  fevers and con-tagious diseases. The inhabitants are for the most  p u t 

Tartars. The town is rather picturesque,  estencls  along a  narrow 

neck of the sen up to the mountains, is surrounded with amall, and provided with a citadel. The palace of the shahs is in ruin, and there are  medcheds  to  which  their minarets give rather a fine appearance. 

## KOUBA, on the  rivcr  of the same name (Koubatchai), is the chief  placc  of the most important district in  Daghestan. 

That  district  is composed of about three hundred villages. R U I N S A S D CONVENTS. CHAPTER X.               

> Ruins and Convents-Disastrous Climates-Mortdity inthe Russian Garrisons-The Means to Prevent it-The Temple of Pitzunder-Nzketha
> -Uplotichoi-The Convent of the Capuchins a t Kutaio.

IT has been remarked that, through a fatality inherent in things here below,  the  finest climates are unhealthy.  On 

the other hand,  the  countries that are the most happily situated, are the worst ruled. Those persons who find aconsolation for every  e d ,  pretend that if things were otherwise, paradise would exist on earth ; I doubt it, but I believe that hell is very near the spot where the seat of paradise has been. Hell is on the shoresof the Black Sea, thanks to the epidemics thatreign there; thanks also to Nicholas, who has chosen it for a place of exile. The unfortunate beings 

who  have been  banish~d  there are continually saying, that they would prefer Siberia to the enchanting regions of Colchis; in fact,  men  are not  killed  by cold, as they are by an atmosphere filled with pestilential miasma ; so Nicholas knows well  what  he is about when he banishes his enemies to a part where no one dies a natural death.  It  is, indeed, 

a heartrending spectacle to see Russian soldiers  wander, 

> Q

like shadows,  nnder  magnificent vines and fig trees. The pine trees, which  surrorind  thc  barracks of  thc  garrison of 

Pitzunda,  exercise  undoubtedly  a baneful influence upon the  liealtll  of soldiers.  The  stagllant  xater  at the  moutli 

of the  Cllopi  produces a fatal  effcct  on the garrison of Redoubt-Kale; it is intended to turn  OK  these waters, 

bnt  Potc,  at the  mouth  of  the  Rhion,  has not become 

more  salubrious  since  the forests have been cleared. 'This evil is owing to the marshes which surround the town, and to the unwholesome food given to soldiers : fevers rage specially in the months of July and August. The Turks, 

du&  those baneful months,  took  care to remove their garrisons to another  localit~r.  The Russian Government shows less humanity, and cares not for the destruction of a third  O F  the garrisons. I t s  culpable  indifference is explained thus  :-the  men of whom the garrisons are composed have, for  the  most part, committed political or disciplinary offences, which they expiate through death. The  Scoptz.i,  a sect of Russian heretics  who  mutilate themselves that  they  may not yield to carnal temptations, are very numerous among the exiles, and their eunuchs' faces complete the repulsive picture  mhich  is offered i n the 

dospitah  of the Russian forts i n that  part  of the Caucasus. They have made many proselytes among the sailors of the Sea of Azov. The Scoptzi constitute almost all the garrison of Pitzunda, which consists of 250 men, and their habitations are remarkable for their cleanliness. The temple of Pitzunda was erected in the year 500, by the Emperor Iustinianus. Like all Greek churches, i t is in the shape of a cross ;half of it is of brick, and the other of free-stone; its cupola,  with  round painted  windows,  is supported by four immense columns, sixty feet high.  The 

rerdnre  which covers all this imposing edifice  gives  i t an  

> '

old appearance, if it does not add to its beauty. I n the restibule and the interior are seen, in fresco, representations of the Crucifixion, the Descent from the Cross, the Resting, and the Virgin  31ary  at the feet of cur Lord. The  nave  is separated from the  mings  by columns, which support a gallery. I n the chapel there is an  altar 

of white marble supporting a cross; the fresco and the columns of that part are in a ruinous state ; they never-theless are still a fair specimen of the taste of Greek artists. The  mall  which surrounds the temple,  and  the remains of other edifices,  allow  us to suppose that on that site there mas also a convent. There is already a priest to officiate i n the temple, and if he is not an  exile,  we hope that the money, destined for divine service in  the  temple,  will  be properly employed. The most ancient cathedral in Georgia is that of  Sweti-

Tzhnoveli, at  Mzlretha,  the  ancient  residence of the kings of Georgia. I t s date is of the third century, and it owes its existence to  Icing  Miriam. It has undergone several demo-litions and reconstructions. Its shape is also that of a cross, and its cupola belongs to the  Ionian  style. 

UPLOSTSICIIOS, the tomn of grottoes,  omes  its name to a

viliage  situated near Gori, and is the best preserved of all the ruins  of  the Caucasus.  It  was founded at the time when the Armenians mere pagans, and  m-hen  the Georgians worshipped trees. The construction belonged to  tlie  Per-sian style, but the  inscriptious  that have been  cliscorered 

there are some in the Arabian and others in the Armenian language.  The  grottoes of the rich are large,  and  admirably 

well  wrought. Uplostsichos is  very  supcrior  to a subterranean  tomn = 

> T B E CAUCASUS.

which exists in the  Crimea,  on the mountain of  Tepekeft-

man. There are vaults and columns found there  skilfully 

executed. There is at Kutais a convent of Capuchins,  rrhieh  can-not long resist the effects of the bad-will of the Russian government. I n fact, Russian authorities try to work its ruin, by surrounding it with  every  kind of obstacle and vexation. With regard to the Pope,  who  ought to protect it, his influence is not felt at such a distance. Por instance, the Catholic priests are forbidden to make pro-selytes, and to convert the  nati?es,  whether they are pagans or  mussulmans.  Besides, there are in the convent only  two 

monks, and they live pretty well. The convent of  Khopi  is the burying place of the  Dadiani, 

princes of  Mingrelia.  An archimandrite is the superior of the convent; and the  few  monks who live under his autho-rity belong to the order of St. Basil, and follow the  Grego-

rian  ritual. CHAPTER XI. PROGRESS  m D  REVERSES O F THE  RUSSIAYS.             

> Tmoutorakan-Tjumen --Acquisition of lmcretia -P e t e i s I-Catherine's Conquests-Onion of Geargia -Zizisnof -Termolof-Rosen-Golovin-
> Neidhard-Prince Woronzof-Late Events.

# THE successors of  Mithridates  mere expelled from the kingdom of the  Bospl-iorus  by Russian princes,  who  re-

rneained  in the possession of that  part  of the Caucasus, till the arrival of the Huns. The Russian prince,  Sviatoslav, founded  Tmoutorokan  ;

and the Russians maintained themselves in the west 

Caucasus till they were expelled from it by the Polovtzi, towards the beginning of the eleventh century. It was 

only i n the sixteenth century that the Russians appeared again in the Caucasus ; but this time they came  from  the opposite side to the mouth of the  Volga. 

The  Circassians  fought under the standard of Ivan  IV., 

before Astrakhan, and in  Livonia.  It  was  in 1568 that the 

ftussians  founded the town of Tjumen, on an arm 

of the Terek, at the place  where  it falls into the Caspian Sea; but, two years after, on the request of the Sultan Selim, who mas incited by the Tartars, they left it, and the Cossacks,  who  mere called after the name of the  tomr,, 

Terki,  nere  allowed to  take  possession  of it. Towards the end of the sixteenth century the Russians built the  fori; 

Koiza. Tn 1604 they mere expelled from  Daghestan  by the Turks, and  the  commander,  Boutourlin,  was assassi-nated.  Hovever,  Terki remained faithful to Russia. It 

was  under the  Vojemode  Golovin,  v h o  struggled against the influence of the  false  Demetrius,  in  tlie  province of Astrakhan.* 

A Dutch engineer,  Klausen,  sent by  Alesis  Wikhailo-

witch, fortified Terki ; and  s Scotchman, Thomas Bayly, completed his works in 1670. I n  1'7 11 the  Grebensky  Cossaclts  obtained  from  Peter I. the authorisation of settling on the  'l'erelr,  and they formed the first five  Stanitzas.? 

By the treaty of 1792 Persia yielded to Russia the 

eastcrn  and southern coasts of the Caspian Pea, 

The  chief, or at least the most easy acquisition of the Russians in the Caucasus mas that of Imeretia, under the Czar Alexis Milrhailowitch. I n  hct,  Alessnder,  the Czar of the  Imeretians,  who,  like his predecessors, assumed tlie title of  (' King of Kings," resolved to follow the example of Alexander  11,  king of Kachetia, and with all his terri-tory to deliver himself up to Russia. So, in  1650,  he took, i n the church, his oath to be faithful to the  Moscovite 

Czar, and all the people  who  mere present swore in a  loud 

voice to be his slaves. However, i t mas only  under  the 

reign of the Emperor, Alexander, I that  Mingrelia  a d 

Imeretia were  declared  to be Russian provinces. 

## * Sec  Zouboff  Kartina  Kabvkaskngo  Iirnjm,  TO].  iii. 

t Starajga,  Khovaja,  Gladza,  hurdaulcou~n, and  Tcherwienvni. 

Several  Russim  families,  belonging  to merchants, having been,  in  1711,  murdered by  the  Lesghians,  Peter I. marched 

a g x m t  them in  1721,  at the head of 20,000 men, who mere supported  by  craks  sailing on the Caspian Sea. He de-feated the Lesghians, founded  on  the  SouIak  the fort Sviatoilirest, (Holy Cross) took  Derbend,  ordered a descent 

to  Bakou  and indicated the  most  favourable  spots for the erection of forts. The  Ernpress  Anna lost all her possessions in the Cau-casus, and  founrlccl  Kisliar,  on an arm of the  Terek  of  the 

same name, which became the limit of Russian possessions i n the Caucasus. The Empress  Elizebeth  sent  missiofiaries  to the Ossetians, who built a church, but made only a few proselytes. The Empress Catherine  11. estended  Russian domination over the  (laucasus,  ou a large scale. She took possession of Kabardah, and founded there  MosdoL-.  The Zaporogues, who  Iiad  joined  thz  T2rks  against her, submitted to the Russians, and mere established along the Kuban and the Terek. The towns of Georgiewsk, Stavropol, and  Ekatero-

nograd  rose under the direction of General Jalroby. I n  1780,  Potemkin  invaded Patigorsk; and in 1784  Con-

stantinogorsk and  Vladilravkas  mere constructed.  I n  1785 

General  Lazareff  defeated  Ornar  Eman,  as well as Alex-ander, the Georgian Czarewitch, on the river  Tora,  and Georgia was definitively occupied. Anapa and Soudjoum Kale were then in the power of the Turks,  who  kept there a garrison. Those forts were taken by the Russians, during the mar they had  with  the Turks ; but after the peace they mere restored  t o ,  the Sultan. Georgia, devastated by the Persians and the  ~ e s ~ h i s , 128 T H E  CACCASUS. 

united itself to Russia, under Paul I., by a treaty, signed on the 28th of September 1800, by George XIII., the son of  Xeraclius,  an idiot prince, against  ~;Jom  disturbances were created by his own brothers. But, in 1802, the Emperor Alexander proclaimed Georgia to be a Russian province. However, after the  disastrous  espedition of 1808, against  Erivan,  Alexander exhibited a more pacific disposi-tion, and, in 1813, the Genvese Scassi established com-mercial factories at Guelendchik and at Pshad. But those factories were destroyed by the  Circassians,  and hostilities mere renewed. Prince  ZizianoF,  a Georgian by birth, and a general  in 

the service of Russia, shoved that there can be more obtained through a wise and cunning policy than through violence. He brought Abhasia under the  Eussian  domination, arid maintained himself in it through a wise administration. He, moreover, seized upon the fortress of  Gangin,  which he surnamed  Elizabetopol.  H e  nr,as,  on the  8th  of Feb-

ruary 1806, treacherously assassinated by the Persians, at the very moment when he advanced to receive the  keys  of the fortress of  Bakou.  His body is lying in Sion Cathe-dral at Tiflis, under a monument, raised by the Marquis Paulucci, commander. general of Georgia, in  18 12. General Yermoloff  took,  at that period, the command of the Caucasus, and has  left  there the reputation of the best chief. It must, however, be taken into con-sideration that in his time hostilities had not the import-ance they have since acquired, as intestine  wars  divided the different  Circassian  popdations. 

Yermoloff showed himself generous tovards the allied tribes, but terrible and cruel towards those that opposed him. Among other tortures which he inflicted on prisoners, a ramrod was passed through their ears. The Shamyl of  that  time was  Amoulad-Bey,  who roused 

Daghestan  to mar.  Taken  prisoner,  his  life was spared, but he took to flight. Yermoloff set a price on his head, and crushed the insurrection, but Amoulad-Bey was no more heard of. I n 1818,  YermolofT  erected in  Tchetchenia  the forts 

Groznaia  and Ousmachan-Yout ; but the Tchetchenians seized, through stratagem, upon the fortress  Amir-Hadshi-

Yurt, and slaughtered the  garrizon. 

The two  generais,  Grekof and Lissanewitch, came to besiege the fort. The Tchetchenians defended themselves till their powder was exhausted, when with  sword  in hand 

they  opened a murderous passage through the Russian division. Then it was thought advisable to enter into negotiation.  A single  Mulah  was admitted  into  the council of war. General  Grekof  insulted him. The Mul-lah stabbed him, and killed General  Lissanewitch,  a colonel and two Russian officers, before he fell under the balls of his  unskilful  enemies, who exercised their revenge on his corpse. However, General Yermoloff avenged the death of his lieutenants, by devastating the aouls situated along  -

the  Argun  and the  Sundsha. 

On his accession to the throne, the first thing that Nicholas did was to  recal  General Yermoloff, acting thus through  an  old personal  ramour.  Yermoloff mas succeeded 

by  Paskiewitch,  who  was soon after sent to wage mar against Persia, which ended by annexing to Russia the provinces of  Erivan  and  Nachetchivan,  which are still a part of the 

Caucasus. 

I n  i828,  Paskiemitch  directed with  gIory  the campaign 

a130  THE CAUCASUS. in Asiatic Turkey; but he was  not  fortunate in the Cau-casus.  Thc  expedition which, in 1831, he undertook  to 

Abhasia,  m m  sterile in results, but fertile in  loss  of men. 

The  Polish mar recalled him for ever from the Caucasus. He mas replaced there, ad interim, by General  PankratieE, 

who signalized himself in several expeditions. It was in the year 1831 that the  Eussian  General,  Pulla,  experienced a great defeat in the defile of  Argun  (devil), the Gibraltar of Tchetchenia. He left there 200 men dead, and carried 

away  with him 300 soldiers killed and 500 wounded. General Wiliaminof, who commanded the army of the Cis-Caucasus, inherited a part of Yermoloff's popularity. He was a patriot and a  well-idormed  man, and died anatural death, in the Caucasus, in 1839. H e  unclertook, 

it is true, in 1834, a  fntile  expedition  against the  Cir.. 

cassians of the east, and lost many men, but he founded the fort Nikolaievsk. H e  knew  how to make himself feared by the Tchetche. 

nians,  and in his orders of the day used to  write-Ir  The infamous  Tchetcheuia  rebels again." But his proclamation to  the  Cjrcassians,  in which he invited them to submit, is a model of the most presumptuous insolence-" If  hea. 

ven,"  he said to them, "mere to fall, it would be supported by Russian bayonets.'' General Sass had, through his unforeseen  excursions, 

caused himself to be so much feared that  Circassian  mothers used to frighten their children mith his name. However, such had  also  been the case mith regard t o  Zizianof,  and 

even to  Medem,  who signalized themselves by their cruel-ties, as, indeed, did the majority  of  the Russian soldiers: 

'Pith  regard to Yermoloff, he was called by the  Circassims, 

> "

The  Russian  devil " (shaitan.) 

General Roaen had, in 1832, succeeded  Paskiemitch  in the general government of the Caucasus. War had spread considerably since the apparition of  Ihi-Xoullah,  who, like the prophet, marched mith the sword in one hand and the Koran in the other. .He roused  Daghestan  to 

hostili~ies and attacked the most important  flussiiln  for-tresses on the Caspian Sea- such as  Terku  and  Der-

bend-aud pillaged the outskirts of  Kisliar;  he moreover threatened t o invade Tchetchenia; but General Rosen re-solved to strike a decisive  blow  against him, and to destroy his strength in  IIemry,  his native town. For that purpose he placed himself, in September, 1832, at the head of the espedition; but the honours of the victory won at Hemry belong to General Wiliaminof, under whose directions the battle was fought. On the  14th  of October the  Lesghh 

were defeated, the  Murides  killed,  and  Kasi-Modah  him-self died fighting to the last. At twenty-five versts from Hemry rose the fortress of 

Temrfichan-Shoura,  so called after the name of the aoul, that recalls the recollection of  the  celebrated  Timour. 

I t was believed, at that time, that everything mas settled with regard to the Caucasus; but Hamsad-Bey took the place of  Kasi-Modah,  and, to preserve Avaria from his domination, General  Lanskoi  marched, in 1834,  against 

Hemry, whose inhabitants sided with the  new  M o d a h . 

On hearing of the approach of a Russian detachment, they barricaded themselves at the head of the  Koissou  bridge, in order to maintain their communications between the two banks of the river. About twenty  voIunteers,  of the celebrated regiment of Kour, placed at the head of the columu, carried the barricades,-the enemy took to flight, and  Mernry  was entirely destroyed by the Russians. But 132  THE CAUCASUS. that town has risen again from its ruins as by enchant-ment; and two years  afterwards  no vestige of  devas-

tation was to be seen. However, justice requires that  we 

state that the victory was owing to Colonel Kluge  van 

Blugenau,  who has since been made a lieutenant-general, 

I n  1837, in  order  to prevent Shamyl from seizing  upon 

Avaria,  General  Fezi  marched against the  aoul  Telitla, 

mhere  the bey  ha&  retired with his uncle Eibet  Magon. 

That campaign mas called  the  Avarian expedition. Hav-ing, transformed  Khansakh  into a fortress,  to  the great displeasure of the Avarian  allies,  the Russians entered 

A d a ; *  and on the 9th of June thep presented themselves before  Ashiltakh,  an  aoul  of 300  Baklias,t  standing on avery strong position, and where 5,000 Circassians offered an obstinate resistance during a whole day. Ashiltakh  was 

taken, but not without some considerable Ioss. The inhabitants of that village, as well as those of Tchirkata, had concealed their riches in the grottoes of 

Akho~~lgo, where the family of Shamyl had taken refuge. I t was a fort formed by nature-a nest in rocks inac-cessible on every side. After having destroyed,  by 

cannon, the  toiers  of old Akhoulgo, a battalion of the regiment of Apsheron seized upon a part of the forts and carried  away  sixty Amauates  (Avarian  hostages), 

whom  Shamyl detained near himself; but Shamyl received a considerable reinforcement, and the Russians mere com-pelled to retreat on the 16th of June. The mountaineers 

pursued  them with shouts of triumph as far as the defile of  Achalta,  which is one verst distant from  Akhoulgo; 

However,  the 6th company of the regiment of  Kour  saved the 

## * The Russian soldiers  calIed  it India,  and  Avruria  Bavaria. 

t H ~ s in  the  rocks. 

detachment, by defending the defile until  they  had time to carry pieces of artillery up the heights and to begin to fire on the enemy; a battalion arriving, just in time from Hemry, repulsed the mountaineers. Notwithstanding all this, the detachment attacked Telitla on the 3rd July (old style), and the next day a general assault was carried on, and the fight lasted all day; the 5th and 6th were employed in parleying with Shamyl, who gave his nephew Hamzat as an 

hostage and promised to remain faithful. I t was in the  same  year, 1837, that the Emperor Nicholas visited Tiflis. The sight of the  Ouroussian*  Sultan did not prodnce on 

the  mountaineers the effect that mas expected; he mas disfigured by an inflammation on his cheek,  and  when  he told them that  " he had sufficient powder to  blom  up their mountains" thep did not form a high  'opinion  of his intellect. The emperor was struck  with  the abuses that were com-mitted in the Caucasus, and showed his desire to punish the shameful  malversatjons  of the chiefs : for that purpose he, at a review, took  off  the aiglets of his aide-de-camp, Prince Dadianof, the son-in-law of the general-in-chief, and gave them to the son of Rosen, in order not to hurt the feelings of the General too much. However, amutual discontent mas the result of the proceeding. Rosen was  recalled,  and, in 1839, the emperor sent  Lieutenant-

General  Golovin  to replace him, who before held the office of minister of public instruction at Warsaw. The nem general-in-chief, whose army was raised to 75,000 men, resolved to strike  a decisive  blom,  and ordered General  Grabbe  to seize upon Akhoulgo. 

# * The  Circassians  gavo to the Russians the name of  Ouroussians. 134 THE CAUCASUS. 

Akhoulgo  is a Tartar word, which means a place of meeting at a moment of alarm. The  ltussians  call it acastle because it is shut up on every side, is composed of a compact mass of rocks, and is divided into two  parts-

the old and the new Akhoulgo, whose circumference is only two versts. On one side that mass of rocks rises per-

pendicularly  above  Koissu,  to  the height of one hundred fathoms ; and on the other side it  runs  down into inac-cessible defiles, intersected by torrents. Sharnyl, profiting by his defeats of 1837, had still more strongly fortified that  frightful  post; in doing this he had recourse to modern art, and, assisted by foreigners, had raised ramparts and digged subterranean vaults in the most favourable and most exposed places, Not satisfied with these formidable preparations, he had placed  two  detach-ments to stop the Russians on their way : the first opposed, 

iu fact, their march at  Buturnay,  but it was overthrown; and the' second, composed of 10,000 men, fought near 

Argouani  on the 30th and 31st of May, and lost 1,500 men. 

Grabbe  hlockaded,  during two months, Akhoulgo, with eight  battalions,  which, on the 15th of July, were reinforced by five more. On seeing the defiling of three magnificent battalions of the  regiment  of the Count of  Erivan  (Pas-

kiewitch), the  officers  said-" To-morrow  two  of them will be killed  :"  in fact, on the next day, an unfortunate assault was undertaken, and only one single battalion of that 

re,bent  came back. On  the  17th of August, the advanced forts of the new Akhoulgo were taken, and a murderous battle was fought during five days  ; on the 22nd of the same month (old style), the anniversary of the coronation of the  Emperor 

Nicholas, the Russians entered  Alihoulgo.       

> PROGRESS A N D REVERSES OF T H E ItUSS1ANS.

135 

General  Grabbe  sent the son of General Golovin as bearer of that fortunate news to the Czar, who ordered medals to be struck,  in  remembrance of that assault, and distributed to the soldiers. 

Golovin,  who  had  only the rank of lieutenant-general, mas promoted a general-in chief. The plans of the campaign were, every year, traced in the war office at St.  Petersburg;  or if proposed by the general-in-chief they had to be approved by the Emperor. That system was necessarily liable to all the  inconve-

niances of the  Aulic  council of Austria. The clerks of the war office had only few, or wrong notions of the Caucasus; and their plans had, through the force of events, to be necessarily modified  when  they reached their destina-tion. Hence, a great responsibility weighed on the chiefs, who incurred the wrath of the Czar if they did not execute their orders, or if their execution mas attended with afailure. Thus of  all  the forts which, in  1840,  had been projected at the war office, only a single one could be raised : it was that of  Gersel-Aoul. 

The promise of an amnesty to the Tchetchenians having been  paralysed  by the threats of Shamyl, i t became necessary to  carry  war into their country. General  Golo-

fejeff undertook it, and experienced a check at the river 

Valerik,  which General Klngev on Klugenau avenged on the  10th  of July by defeating Shamyl personally. The year 1840 was  signdised  by simultaneous and successive assaults, which the  Circassians  directed against the different Russian forts in the line of the  Kouban.  They took the most important of all, Nikolaievski, which commands the line of  Guelendchik  ; but the fortress of 136  T H E - CAUCAGUY. 

Mikhailof showed an heroic defence, and  when  resistance could be no longer prolonged, the soldiers set the powder magazine on fire and the conqueror was blown up  mith  the garrison. The Russian garrisons had been much reduced by the contagious diseases that raged in winter; but the  Circas-

sinns,  remembering their resistance, did not, for a long time, attempt to besiege the forts. General  Anrep,  who replaced General  Baievski  in the command of the right flank,  undertook  to execute vengeance for the loss of the forts. H e carried an expedition among the Wbikhes and Djegetes, and, assisted by gun-boats, caused them some injury.  Ali-Oku  was killed, but his grandfather,  Hadshi  Dokhum-Okou, the veteran of the Ubikhes, renewed the battle, and the Russians were com-pelled to retreat. I n the spring of 1841, General  Golovin  himself joined 

Grabbe  before Tcherkey, with a small  detachment,  of which he left a part under  thc  orders of General  Vegelsancli,  on the shores of the Koissou. This proceeding has been much criticised, and yet it decided the fate of Tcherkey; for, whilst the main body ascended mith difficulty the .mountains, under a shower of balls, and Shamyl had to be repulsed at every step, General  Vegelsmk  crossed the river and seized upon Tcherkey, but he lost his life in the taking of that town. Tchetchenia was again devastated; but Shamyl, availing  @

himself  of the return of the Russians to their winter camps, collected an army of 15,000 Tchetchenians, invaded the country of the Kumikes, the allies of the Russians, and threatened Kisliar. The colonel-commander of that  t o m 

came out to meet him with 100 soldiers and two cannons. Shamyl destroyed a part of them, and  took  the others prisoners. The commanders of  Groznoia  and of Tcherv-. lenna marched mith their troops  agsinst  Shamyl,  who 

prevented their junction  and  defeated them separately, car-rying away with him  an  immense booty, consisting of cattle. I t was with the view of punishiug Shamyl for his success that  Grabbe,  in the following year, carried the war into the country of the  Gorumlatians.  The chief purpose of the expedition mas to take possession of Dargo, one of the residences of Shamyl, who, on hearing that the Russians were advancing, transported himself to  Andalal. 

The  Naib,  Hadshi-Iagvia,  was defeated by the Russian van-guard; and a detached body, under the orders of 

Prince  Argoutinski  Dolgorouki, having taken possession of Tchirak and  Kumilrh,  brought the  neighbouring  popula-

tions under the domination of the Russians. 

Grabbe  was only ten versts from Dargo when he ordered a retreat, for his loss of men had been considerable; his troops had been continually harassed by the  enemy,  and were completely exhausted through fatigue and hardship. But the retreating Russian army mas nearly annihilated in the forests of Itchkeri; for the Circassians, seeing it retire, were fired with increased  fury,  and rushed upon it with an unparalleled impetuosity, especially on the 1st of June. Having taken prisoner a Russian bummer, they compelled him to beat the drum, and many Russian soldiers, attracted by the  sound,  fell into  the  snare. More than  half 

of the officers were killed ; and the death of  Lieutenant-

colonel  Tresskin  was  particdarly  deplored. Moreover, discipline mas forgotten;* however, at the sight of several 

* We have been told by an  eyc-witness  that  during  that disastrous retreat, a soldier  struck  an officer with his bayonet, in order to take away    

> from him a bottle of portcr.
> 8

cannons, which had been taken by the Circassians,  the 

Russians felt their courage revived, took them back  from 

the enemy, and the column returned with a  loss  of 8,000 men to the fort  from  which it had started. The minister of war, Prince Tchernisheff, was then per. forming a journey of inspection i n the Caucasus, and saw the return of the troops. General  Grabbe  was recalled, though the emperor acknowledged that the rout was more owing to the elements than to the general. Yet, never-theless, the commander-in-chief, who had disapproved of 

the  expedition,  was involved in  Grabbe's  disgrace. He 

retired, leaving his name to an important fort near the Caspian Sea. He mas replaced by General  Xeiilhardt,  who was before an ad  interim  governor-general of Moscow.* General Zass was also compelled to leave Prochnoiokop, whence he had carried on a partisan  war,  fatal to the  m o m 

taineers.  But at length the Circassians had also learned, through their spies, how to shelter themselves from  hie 

razzias. General Golovin had, at the end of  his  administration, pronounced himself in favour of a defensive system, which was adopted by Prince Vorontzof, after the unfortunate expedition directed also against Dargo. T o surround the enemy with a net of forts, to wait for events, and to con-fine themselves to  razzias,-such  was the plan. Failures had,  up  to that time, been attributed to the 

rivalry which existed, not only among the different generals commanding separate troops, but also between themselves and the general governor. However, it was only in 1845 that the emperor thought  of  obviating those misunderstand-

* Golovin  was soon appointed governor-general of Riga, and afterwards        

> amember of the council of the empire.

ings,  by giving an unlimited  power  to Count  Vorontzof. 

who mas also delivered from subordination to the  minister 

of war. But it had also been said that the general-governor at Tiflis was too remote from the field of battle to know what was to be done. The language of  Grabbe  has been con-tradicted by the disaster at  Itchkeri.  Zass acted but too much according to his own notions: and even  now  acertain latitude is allowed to the chiefs of the different pro-vinces. Prince Barratinsky had undertaken several  espe-

ditions on his own responsibility. General Neidhardt showed himself  great  in little things, and a pedant in the  military  profession. I n 1844, he  saw 

ShamyI  take possession of the fort Ounzorila; and  ICIuge 

von  KIugenau,  who had  run  to its defence, with insufficient forces, defeated. Shamyl ravaged all  Avaria.  I n the  foI-

lowing year Neidhardt marched against him, but allowed 

him  to escape. H e therefore mas recalled, and unable to bear his disgrace, died of grief. At the time of the promotion of Count Vorontzof, the army was increased to 150,000 men. The emperor had reserved for  himseIf  the right of  giving 

orders, and the first he gave was a most unfortunate one. He ordered everything to be  sacrificed,for  the purpose of 

taking  Dargo. I t mas to comply with Nicholas's injunction that he undertook his deplorable expedition. Unable to de-fend that nest of no  strategicd  importance, Shamyl allowed it to be taken; but while the  army  was retreating, he attacked it so successfully in the forest of Itcherki, already once so fatal to the Russians, that Vorontzof was 

nearly totally destroyed. Re indeed  would  not have escaped, had not two  Circasvian  emissaries succeeded in 140 T H E  CACCASUS. 

carrying  to General  Fraytag  the order to come to the  help' 

of his chief. 

The  Russians lost in that defeat 4,000 men ; and three 

gperals,  Passek, Fock, and  Voinof,  were among the killed. 

Eye-witnesses  have  told us that the detachment wept  with 

joy on seeing the arrival of the Freytag division, which in fact drew it from the position where it seemed doomed to perish. Count Vorontzof was for that rout remarded with the title of Prince. The  loss  of Passek  Tsas  irreparable. He mas loved  by  the soldiers, and had, during his short and brilliant career, given proofs of a high capacity. The Circassians cut off his  head,  and during several clays carried it triumphantly on a spike. The  Genera%  Sleptzoff and  Kruliovsky  perished in a later engagement; and the diplomacy of Prince Vorontzof had no other result than to bring over to the Russians the 

Naib  Khaclji-Murat,  who  after  haring  learned, in the Russian camp,  all  that he  mished  to know,  Aed  to Shamyl, 

with  fourteen  Murides.  He was attached by 140 soldiers of the  Ossetian  militia, and  55  of his men mere  killed,  and as many mounded. I n 1847, the fort  Golorin,  in the  county  of the  Ubek-

hians, mas attacked by those mountaineers; but they mere so terribly repulsed, and their loss was so considerable that they put to death the Polish deserter  who  had advised them to undertake that expedition.* 

Official  reports state that the expedition which, in 1848, 

# * Mr.  Dikson,  who has visited the  Golovin  fort, says,  ILIts situation is                        

> extremely pleasing, being at the entrance of a valley, cverlooked by wooded hills, ahovc which tower fistant and morc d i ~ t a n t cliffs, lofty and more lofty,
> till snow and clouds veil them from sight."-" Tour to the Caucasus."
> PROGRESS A X D RKVERSES. O F TIIE RUSSIANS.

141 

Shamyl  carried into Kabardah, had no other  result  but to meakcn the prestige attached to that prophet; but they do not say a word  abont  the devastations he committed. According to those official reports,  Shamyl,  at the head of 20,000 men  with  several pieces of cannon, had crossed the Sounja, and wished to surprise the Russian centre. Gene-ral  Freytag,  informed of the fact, concentrated  six  battalions of infantry and  1,000  horse in the fort of  Groznaia.  Acting 

in concert with Generals Nestoroff and  Zavadovsky,  he endeavoured to enclose die prophet in a narrow pass ; so 

Shamyl,  in order to escape, was compelled to disperse his infantry, and flee through the forests at the rate of four versts an hour. Nestoroff crossed the defile of Zontchin, cut down the forests and  destropd  eleven  viIIages  between Assa and the Fortanga. 

Humever,  we can perceive, through that report, that the Russians did not prevent Shamyl from crossing the Terek, and reaching the road to  Goria  ; we  beliere,  also, that a Kabardian chief,  Mahomet  Omosorof, impeded much the retreat of the Russians between the Assa and the  Puta. 

Shamyl  retraced back his steps, crossed again the Sounja, and threatened the Russian line on the Terek.  Lieutenant-

colonel Sleptzoff repulsed him, and, by  making  use of  Con-

greve  rockets, carried  consternation  into the ranks of the 

Circessians. 

General  Shwartz  defeated Daniel Bey at  Katael  : Shamyl attempted to cut off the retreat of the Russians who had just seized upon the  aoul  Guergebil.  Prince Argoutenski 

DoIgorouky  attacked him in spite of the disproportion of his forces ; and if the Russians did not obtain great advan-tages it was  entirely  owing to the cholera, the  snow  which covered the roads,  and  the diversion which Shamyl effected 1$2  THE CAUCASUS. on the  Lesghianline;  so, as it may be seen, it is  always 

the same  tale  over and over again. Colonel  Sleptzoff  made a  successful  expedition on  the 

Valerik. However, the taking of the  aoul  of Salty did  not 

restore tranquillity in Daghestan, as it had been expected. I n 1850, the Grand Duke, heir to the crown,  went  to have his share of fighting in the  Circassian  wars,  and  he 

obtained the cross of St. George for having himself fallen on a band of  mountaiueers  who  attacked his escort  ; and  his 

gallantry contributed to revive the courage of the Russian 

army. 

On the 15th August, 1852, Prince  Bariatinski,  who commanded in the fortress of  Vosdvigenski,  carried on asuccessful expedition. 1,500 men passed the defile of Argoun, that is of  " the Devil,"  which  is eight  versts 

distance from the fortress. They marched against the aoul 

Kankale,  half of the soldiers remaining to guard the defile, which is forty-five feet in height, overspread  with  boinitzi, 

and is considered insuperable ; therefore, says our corres-pondent, the news that the Russians  hadigone  through it, carried terror into the hearts of the Circassians. But we do not understand that terror, for two reasons :

the  f i s t  is, that the Circassians must have expected that the Russians would have passed it, since they did not defend i t ; and the second is, that they soon hastened to the passage in order to drive back the enemy, as was usual with them. And our correspondent himself adds,  

> "

that if the Russians had delayed a  few  minutes longer, the whole detachment would have been annihilated." In fact, as  soon  as they had accomplished their razzia,  killed 

those  who  opposed them,  and  taken prisoners, they came back to the defile where the rear guard  was  attacked, and       

> P R D G K B S S A Y D REYKKSES O P T I I E R U 5 b I d N S .

14.7 

within twenty minutes lost  twelve  officers and seventy soldiers. Colonel  Simeon  Vorontzoff, who commanded the regiment of Chasseurs, called after the name of his father, was, for his share in that expedition, promoted to the  rank 

of general. The present rupture between Russia and Turkey has reanimated the war of the Caucasus. The following account is given to The Times, by its own correspondent at Vienna :-

# " The recent attacks of the Caucasian tribes were di-rected, in the west, against the fortresses and redoubts which are posted along the coast of the Black Sea, from 

Soudjouk  Kale to the fort of  'Nar~~hinskoi, and in the east against the detached post and military cordons which occupy the banks of the  Terek,  and several positions in Daghestan. For a time Prince Vorontzoff was completely surrounded by the Circassians, and  could  not disengage himself until the troops on the Turkish frontier mere sent to his assistance. The 20,000 or 25,000 men,  forwarded 

in haste from Sebastopol, are now on the frontiers of Armenia. 

# ''  Sheik  Shamyl  has informed  Omar  Pasha, the com-mander-in-chief of the Turkish army, that he is prepared to act in concert with him at the head of 20,000 men. The news is spread in  Constantinople  that, after having, as they supposed, gained over  Shamyl,  by making him apresent of 60,000 ducats, the 20,000 Russians, who were in Daghestan, left for the Turkish frontiers. On their way they were attacked, in the defiles of  Zakartala,  by some 30,000 mountaineers,  and  completed routed." The numbers on both sides are evidently exaggerated. W e learn from another part that Sefar Bey, a cele-brateil  Circassian chief, who has been twenty years de-tained at  Adrianople,  started for the coast of the Black Sea, to  organise  an insurrection among his countrymen. The Sultan, perceiving the fault of his predecessors,  who 

had determined the fate of the Circassians, by ceding to the Russians the coast of the Black Sea, without the con-sent of the former, has just now concluded an offensive and defensive alliance  with  Shamyi.  The fort of St. Nicholas has just been taken by  Guyon,  an English rene-gade, who holds the title of Murshed-Pasha, but not without a considerable sacrifice, which, however, has been compensated by a great quantity of munition found in the fortress, among which are 4,000 muskets, of Liege manufacture. 

# "Prince Vorontzoff," writes a friend to me, "is feeble and vain, and the Countess  Choiseul,  a Polish  lady by birth, directs his court, which calls to mind that of Pot  emkin." 

Yermoloff says,  I'  That the Circassians must have in-creased in numbers, because he never  killed  in a year so many Circassians as Vorontzoff does in a single  espedi-

tion." 

I n fact,  when  Vorontzoff wishes to procure for anybody an opportunity of distinguishing himself, he sends him on a false expedition, upon  mhic!~ he may report as he likes. CHAPTER XII. MODE OF WARFARE  IN  THE CAUCASUS.               

> Marches-Difficulties for the Russian Army-Encampments-3Iamers of the Soldiers and Officers-Razzias-Arms of the Cireassians-Treatment of Prisoners-Degradcd Officers-Deserters-Kouznetzoff-Retreats of the
> Russians-Tar in the Caucasus endless.

## THE war costume of the Russian soldier is not the same as that which  he  puts on for reviews. The shako and the helmet are replaced by the foraging cap, which offers but avery weak resistance to the terrible Circassian  shashka 

(sabre). Circassian nobles sometimes wear a coat of mail, which is proof against balls; but the small balls used by the Circassians easily pierce the Russian uniform;  even 

the bayonet glides over the Circassian coat of mail. I n such a case the Russian soldier falls under the blows of his adversary, unless he  dexterousIy  rushes upon  him,  and seizing him by the middle of the body, overthrows and kills him. The light war accoutrement of the Russian soldier is a matter of necessity; in fact, how could he wear a heavy 

armour  in his  harassing  marches? To lighten his burden the infantry knapsack is even replaced by a canvas bag, 

> T

146 T H E CAUCASUS. tied with leather straps, from  w!lich  hang  his  pipe, his brush, and the small pan in which he boils  his  soup;  for the Russian soldier likes neither rich nor cold  food,  and, 

when  he cannot get  anything  better, boils  water  and dips his biscuit in it. The  besace  holds provision for  six  days, linen, and a mirror, a few inches in size, in which the poor soul  now  and then has the satisfaction to contemplate himself. To these objects  sclmetimes  a religious book is added. Happy the man  who  is provided  %nth it ; for, in moments of halt, he becomes  the  reader of the company. But when the journey is resumed the importance  of  the reader vanishes : he is entirely eclipsed by the  lustic,  that is, the merry story-teller, who animates  the  march by his narratives, or his  humorons  jokes, which convulse his com-panions with laughter. Soldiers on the road are  allowed  to carry their gun either on the shoulder or on their back, in order that they may feel its weight Iess. Their muskets are heavy, and of bad quality.  - Happy  the  Jounker*  who has a carbine, and twice happy if he have a double-barrelled one. The Russian soldier does not study elegance. His boots, the  soles  of which he covers with nails, go over his  trow-

sers, and he carries his folded cloak on his shoulder. He is always ready, and good-humoured; for, in the field, he receives an allowance of wine.  V i t h  regard  to  the officer, he hopes  fop  distinction, promotion, and rank. The  lng-

gage is placed in  arbas,?  and when the music has struck up the general march, the column moves on. That music is indeed an object of great curiosity for 

* The nobleman who  is  an ensign.               

> fAn arba is t~ cart with two immense wheels, rising above its borders.
> Arbas are used in Georgia as well as in Daghestnn.

savages. When it is executed in peaceful  aouls,  the mountuineers hasten to the spot, and stand on tip-toe to discover whence those unknown sounds are proceeding. Some approach the instruments closely, and place their ear in the opening. others go so far as to listen to the stick of the drum-major. Madame Pfeiffer, in her  " Journey Round the  world,'^ 

laughs at the Russian music, which she heard at  Tifiis.  It 

is  no doubt inferior to the Piedmontese military music, but it is superior to the music of the  Euglish  regiments. The column, as we have said, moves on; it is long-almost endless; for often, instead of walking  two  abreast, they all proceed one after the other. It is visible from a great distance, from the glittering of the bayonets reflect-ing the rays of the sun. The Cossacks of the Don close the rear, and those of the line have the task to reconnoitre the road. A few cannons are dragged on  with  great dif-ficulty. If a carriage happen to break in the mountains, it is necessary to stop until it is repaired. I n fact, ob-stacles of different  kind  frequently impede the march of t h e army. If it be intended to surprise the enemy, the soldiers march so noiselessly that one would hear a bird fly. However, as the spies of the enemy glide everywhere, the chiefs often keep the purpose of the expedition secret. Let us join the column, when, on ordinary circumstances it  has  ascended the mountain, and seems lost in  the  clouds; and let us listen to the  conversatioil  of the soldiers, as it will give us an insight into their peculiar notions. 

# " Look  !"  says one, '(it is pretended that the clouds are frost, but they are only a mist."  ((  Do you see," adds another,  " yonder, the rainbow on a  rock?  It is reported 148  THE  CAUCASUS. 

that it absorbs water, but there is not a drop of water on the  stoue  where it is resting. I t is merely the reflection of the sun." Ah  !"  another  s q s ,  " if me are  still  going on, 

me  shall ascend up to heaven I How great is the  power  of the Lord  !" 

I t is enough to make any one dizzy to  Iook  from the summit of these mountains to the bottom. The precipices 

that  intersect the soil frighten the most intrepid; and gaping abysses are ready to devour the man whose foot should glide. Nevertheless, a soldier will say to another:  

> "

But see, there are at the bottom stones quite round ;

some are small, and others large; the large ones contain little ones. Do they come  from  hezven,  or are they families of stones, which  grow  u p ? He is not a good spirit who plays with such  bowls."  " When me are in Arabia 

(Avaria),  and in  h d i a  (the  a o d  Andi),  we shall have  such 

a quantity of  bourkous,  that me will make tents with them." Let us now  mitiess  another scene-the halt is ordered; the muskets are arranged into circular piles; tents are erected, if there be  room  ; but if the space be not sufficient for that purpose, the  officer  is satisfied with sheltering  bim-

self in his cloak, on one half of which he lies down. Fires are lighted, every  one  warming himself in his turn. He who is harassed with fatigue naturally falls asleep  ; and sometimes his cloak is caught by the  fire;  then he is awakened and told, You have caught a fox." 

The Samovar (kettle) always follows the officers of the same tent.  How  beneficial is tea in those marches! It revives and warms a man, by spreading a beneficent balm 

through his veins. Tea,  mhich  when  taken  habitually and every day, is but a common beverage, becomes, under those circumstances, a welcome luxury. Rich officers convey provisions, wine, fowls, and porter, in their luggage; but those who are poor have nothing except oatmeal  mith  suet, and mutton, either dried or broiled. Should it rain very hard, the water penetrates the tents, and falls on your clothes, and everything you have  ; nothing can be  more  disagreeable, except the over-whelming heat of the summer, which torments you with an unquenchable thirst. When the column arrives at a  friendIy  aoul, the inha-bitants come to trade with the soldiers, bringing fruits, milk, eggs, and butter; and receiving in exchange Russian coin; but they prefer silver to copper, and return the pieces of copper for half their value. At the sight of the first rays of the sun, the column resumes its journey, always so painful in the mountains, that sometimes the army walks but fifteen versts a day. I t often happens  that  the cannon can only be taken to the top of rocks on the backs of the men. A cannon is the ter-ror of the Circassians  ; they  call it  " one thousand men," thus  exaggerating  its importance, or its  efIkct;  or they give it the name of  " old gun," or  (' the emperor's  pistoI." 

When an  aoul,  which has revolted, is to be chastised, it is seldom taken by surprise. The inhabitants abandon their dwellings before the arrival of the Russians, carry away mith them everything they have, and leave  merely 

the bare walls.  They  retire into the mountains, and 

adopt  measures to cut off the retreat of the Russian de-tachment, or to pour showers of balls on it as it returns. 

Tn  such cases their fields are ravaged, and  their  saklias 

burned  down.  ,

But on many occasions the inhabitants remain and in-trench themselves in their subterranean huts, which have M O D E  O F  XVARPAKE.  151 

to be taken by assault,  and  only mith a great  sacrifice  of men. The Russian soldiers must  ~ i e r c e the walls and pass from one  saklia  to another,  accordillg  to the chances of the fight and the nature of the soil. Balls are showered from the lower lodgings, and  the  upper  saklias  have to be stormed  mith  the bayonet. The fight is carried on in the streets and on the rocks; it is a desperate struggle-a deadly duel between man and man, in mhich the bayonet and the sword contend against the  Circassian  dagger and sabre. The Tchetchenians  follow  in general the first mode of warfare,  and  the  Lesghians  the second. They are attached to their dwellings and defend them to death. The  Circassians  consider their arms as their most valu-able wealth. They preserve and transmit them as a sacred inheritance : hence me find in their possession the most rare sabres, the most precious daggers, lances of ancient crusaders, Italian pistols, on  whicb  me find Latin inscrip-tions, and sometimes curious ones. Those inscriptions explain the origin of those pistols, and the names of their first possessors. As a proof of the excellence of  Circmsian  arms, I may state. that the barrels of Russian muskets have been cut into  two  parts, in the battle, by a stroke of the  shashka. 

Russian officers could not do better than adopt those sabres. I do not hesitate to declare that the use of  the 

point  mould  answer their purpose better; but fencing is 

still unknown to the  Sclavonians,  and  they  have i n general 

a great aversion to the use of the point. "Pigs," they say,  ((are  run through, but not men." But, after all, what is a bayonet or a lance, if not a kind of pitch-fork  ? Yet Russian  peavants  very willingly make 

use  of the pitch-fork. A m.tn  may be  dangerou4y  mounded with the edge of the sword, but he is  more  sure!y  killed  mith  the point. Hence the advantage of Frenchmen over Russians in iso-lated  engagem~nts, and of Piedmontese over Austrians in  n

single fight. Men have been  knomn  who  had  received ten, twenty, and forty strokes of the sabre  without  having been entirely disabled, and who have been restored to perfect health. Circassians have learned  how  to ward off the bayonet; 

whilst  the Russian officers do not know themselves  how  to parry the shashka. 

The maxim of Souvoroff, followed up to the present time in the Russian army, and according to mhich,  "A  ball is mad-it finds the guilty, but the bayonet is brave," is, in our opinion, an absurd principle. Russian soldiers fire without taking aim; that may answer against a column, but not against isolated  Circassiaru.  Finland sharp-shooters, who are excellent shots, have at length been sent to the Caucasus; and Russian sharp-shooters have  also 

been improved  ; yet, in the art of firing, the Russians are very inferior to French or English soldiers. Now, if an  aoul  be taken by surprise, all its defenders are 

killed,  and  thc  woinen  and  children  carried away prisoners, During the fight no quarter is given. I t is difficult to determine which of the two belligerent parties is  less  harsh towards its prisoners. Those taken by the Circassians become slaves, and must  kork  in the fields, or  they  are shut up in prison, where they are often beaten, until their ransom arrives; however, much depends upon the temper of the master into whose hands they fall ; some keeping their prisoners tied to a chain during the night. With regard to the barbarous custom of having short horse-hair introduced, by means of incisions, into the  heels 

of prisoners, to prevent their escape, it is but very seldom practised, and only towards those  who  have, several times, attempted to run  away. 

Let us now come to the Russians as masters. Siberia 

mcas- 'and prisons in the south of Russia are filled  mith  <'' 

siang  called brigands, wnose great crime, in general,  has 

consisted in heroically  fighting  for the defence of their native land. The Circassians  make  a difference between a deserter and a prisoner. Whoever comes freely among them is hospitably received; and there are many Russian deserters 

who  quietly  dmell  i n Lesghian or Tcherkessian  aouls. 

They have, in fact, become Circassians, having wives and children. But the  Tcherkessians  mistrust renegades, though less than did the Algerians, who always compelled deserters to fight in the first rank. As Russian  soldiem  are not ill treated when on service in the Caucasus, and the kind of life led by the moun-taineers has but little attraction for them, they seldom are tempted to desert,  -and  to expose themselves to be retaken, brought  beck,  and flogged through the line. Even among the Poles deserters are not so numerous  aa  is supposed. There is a numerous  dass  of men among the soldiers of the Caucasus, which the government turns into a military 

and, above all,  ~olitical Botany-bay-we speak of the de-graded. That  class  ought, according to appearances, to supply a great number of deserters; but such is not the case. The degraded, who have not been punished for any dishonest deed, are treated with so much delicacy that they do not think of passing over to the enemy. MODE OF  WARPARE.  153 

Out of the ranks, the officers continue to associate with their former companions, or with the ex-nobles  ; the soldiers, however,  show  them respect.  How  could it be otherwise, in presence of death, that  equalises  all  ? There-fore me are not afraid to  procIaim  our approbation of those noble promptings which, after  dl,  are Christian feelings ;

and me obey the commands of truth, without fearing the cruelty of Nicholas,  who  has often reproached generous men  mith  that kind of familiarity. The chiefs, no doubt, do not all act in  the  same manner; but the most severe would consider it disgraceful to strike, even in the ranks,  

> a

political degraded. These men, compelled to be soldiers, sometimes endeavour to escape to Turkey or Persia, but they do not go over to the Circassians to fight against their  own  countrymen. We must add, however, that some generals, though kindly disposed, fearing the reports of the gendarmes, are under the necessity of  mai~taining a certain reserve, and would not dare to invite any degraded to their table. Among the most renowned Russian deserters me  wiU 

mention  Kouznetzoff,  an artist in fireworks, of the Russian artillery, who, being reprimanded by his general on account of a firework, joined Shamyl, carrying mith him an im-placable hatred against Russian nobles and officers. H e never ceases to ask Shamyl to place at his disposal the life of every Russian  oEcer  who is made prisoner; but the 

Circassian  chief does not yield to his entreaties. 

However,  one  Gay  that Shamyl had taken twenty-two Russian  oEcers,  KouznetzofF  swore  that  he would have their lives. He stopped the provisions sent to them  from  I

the Russian camp; ordered a cask of honey to be opened, and found in it a letter, addressed to their chief, a lieutenant-  

> U154 TEE CAUCASUS.

colonel, in which the means of escaping  mith  his com-panions mere indicated to him. Kouznetzoff showed that document to  Shamyl,  and obtained permission to dispose of the prisoners, among  whom  there were several superior officers. H e caused them all to be hanged. Atachikof, a Cossack  officer, who, irritated by the pro-ceedings of a superior  chief,  had passed over to the  Circau-

sians,  was not so cruel towards Glebof, whom I have intimately known, and who mas, with my brother, an  aide-

de-camp to General  Golovin,  afterwards to  GeneralNeidhart, 

and finally to Prince  Vorontzoff.  I n 1844, Glebof was sent to St. Petersburg with the despatches of General 

Neidhart.  Atachikof, having heard of his departure, per-suaded the  Circassians  to seize him on the road to  Stav-

ropol, and was charged, with  six  Lesghians,  to carry the project into execution. Glebof was a man of uncommon courage;  but,  dangerously  wounded,  he was made prisoner, and obtained his liberty for the sum of 2,000 silver rubles. We are now going to relate an anecdote of a different character, which shows that some Circassians also pass over to the Russians. Baron  Turnau,  an aide-de-camp to General  Gourko, 

went in disguise among the Uhikhes, in order to be-come acquainted with their country. He was discovered, and shut up in a dungeon, where he  sufl'ered  horribly, on account of the  delay  of his ransom. A serf of the chief who detained him prisoner, killed his master, whose con-. duct had excited his vengeance, delivered the baron,  and- '

conducted him back among the Russians on his  OWII 

horse. The Circassians never leave the corpses of their brothers on the field of battle, or in the hands of the enemy. They MODE  OF  WARFAHE.  155 prefer to give up victory rather than abandon their dead, and they come to demand them of the Russians. One day General  Raiefski,  who  commanded on the right flank, restored them their fallen countrymen, saying,  " That he did not  wage  war against the dead." The Circassians answered, that "They prayed to God he would not leave his body without burial, if he ever fell in battle.', The Russians also carry off their dead, when they can do it. The Cossacks especially  show  themselves  scrupu-

Ious  in paying the last duties to their brothers killed in the fight. The greatest disasters of the Russians occur in their retreat. The enemy wait for them in the forests and defiles, and if the Russians have not taken the precaution to occupy them, which cannot possibly be done for a great distance, they lose there more men than in  all  the rest of the expedition, besides the booty which  is  often taken from them, with part of their own luggage. The retreat, embarrassed  mith  the wounded* and the prisoners, is always difficult, and beset with hardships. I n general the march  of  the army is more harassing than fighting itself. Moreover, fever and dysentery ravage the Russian army,  t3  the extent of carrying off 20,000 men annually. 

When  is, then, an end to be put to the war ? The  aouls 

just subdued rebel as soon as the Russians have withdrawn, or the  Murids  come there. Peace, say the Russian mili-tary men, cannot be obtained unless all the inhabitants are slaughtered. That measure has always been rejected by the Russian government, which plumes itself on its         

> The Cucaasians treat rounds better than Russian surgeons do.

156  T3E  CAUCASUS. MODE OF WARFARE. 157 humanity; but which shows so little concern for the chro-nic effusion of blood, caused by this protracted war. There might be colonization, it is true, but the  popu. 

lation  of Russia is not sufficiently numerous  to  colonise 

the Caucasus; besides, the inhabitants of the plain are not willing to leave their fertile fields, to go and cultivate rocks in the mountains. The Russian forts are too isolated to  afford  timely assist-ance to one which is threatened; while the Circassians, by  uniting  forces, superior to those of the garrisons,  will 

have more chance of attacking them successfully in detail, on awhen they have improved in the art of  carryin, 

siege, or have artillery at their service. I n the meantime they undertake  san,pinarp  irruptions among the Russian colonists, execute  razzias,  carry away the cattle, and some-times the wives of the Cossacks, a thing  which  does not occur in the war of Algiers. Moreover the Russian forts, though very numerous, have: been found to be insuf-ficient. The system of forts was abandoned in Africa by  ~ e n e r a l 

Bugeau and replaced with advantage by mobile columns. It is true that movements are more  difficult  in the Cau-casus than in Africa,  and  the Russians have  still  a great 

d e d  to learn  fiom  the French in the art of mar. 

One cannot help smiling on reading, in the work of 

# ''  Hornmaire  de Hill," that the prolongation of war in the Caucasus is owing to the essential difference which' exists between its mountains and other mountains.  " In the Caucasus," he says,  ccnaked  rocks cover the feet  of 

the mountains, and the plains, instead of being there, are 

spread on the summit." But such is not the general cha-racter of those ridges. 

A writer in the  "Recue  des  Deux  Mondes,"  April, 1853, 

asks if Algeria is not as mountainous as the Caucasus. The highest summit of the Atlas is 7,000 feet, and that of the  Caucasus  17,000. Besides, the forests of the Caucasus offer more obstacles  to  the passage of armies than those of Algeria. There are marshes in both countries, it is true, but saklias are  unknown  in Africa. Moreover, the French soldier is more fit for war in the mountains than the Russian soldier, who becomes inferior to himself  mhen 

he is out of the ranks, isolated, and does not feel the elbow of his  neighbour.  Russian soldiers require to be collected into masses, and kept under the control of military discipline. As long as the spirit of the army is not altered, the Russian soldier will be a bad sharp-shooter and a bad partisan. 

Razzias  liave  not been borrowed  from  the French. The Cossacks have never carried on any other kind of war; and Yermolof practised them. But a  Lamoriciere  might accomplish great things in the Caucasus. In order to give a further insight into the character of the  Circassians,  we will state the fact, not sufficiently known, that the Mamelukes of  ~ & t were of  Circassian 

origin. Under the domination of  Syricus  in Egypt,  Melec-Salha, 

jealous of his vassals, ordered a great number of Christian slaves to be sent to him  from  Circassia and  Mingrelia.  H e composed an army with them, and as they continued to be slaves, they received the name of  Mamelukes.* 

The Mamelukes were powerless against French squares,        

> "Modden's Travels in Turkey, Egypt, md Pale~tine."

158 THE CAUCASUS. 

and the  Circassians  seldom attack Russian columns.  In 

fad, Napoleon is reported to have said :-

"One single  Mameluke  is equal to ten French horse-men; but one hundred foot soldiers will rout one  thouswd 

Mamelukes." 

> DAGHESTAN.

# CHAPTER XIII.  

> DAGHESTAX.
> Limits

-Inhabitants -The  Lesghians  -Avaria  - Sass - Gardens -  

> Women-Marriages -XUs

- Bridges -The Parcelling of the Land-Suphism-Retaliation. 

# ENGLISH travellers have visited the  west  of the Caucasus :

French and German tourists have overrun Georgia, and described the country subjected to Russia; but Daghestan, the field of war, is yet unknown to Europe. To make the commercial and political world acquainted  with  it, is the important task that we have undertaken. The  word  hest st an  is of Mongolian origin, meaning, 

# "the country of the mountains." Daghestan is a triangle, formed, on the south, by the Caspian Sea, on the north by the river Soulak (soft water), and by the chain of moun-tains which unites the Soulak to the sea, and disappears in .

i t to the south of the town of Kouba. The Russians divide Daghestan into  two  parts : the 

southern  part extends from Kouba to Derbend, and the northern from Derbend to the Soulak.  Lesghistan  is the territory situated between the ridge of the mountains and  .) 160 THE CAUCASUS. the sea. The river  Soulak,  before taking this last  name, 

flows into two arms of the sea, which are called  Koissou 

(in Tartar, the water of the sheep). The country  corn-

prised between these two Koissous, is Avaria. Daghestan is inhabited by Tartars and Lesghians, who call themselves  Taoul,  that is mountaineers. The first occupy the borders and the plain, the second were probably driven into the mountains by those same Tartars. The Tartars are governed by khans, the most  consider-

able of  whom  are the Shamkhal of Tarki and the Khan of Mekhtoulin. The Lesghians consist of patriarchal  associations,  ruled by the elders, whose power is very limited, being only apparent in  gener,al  enterprises. The judges (cadi) decide civil contentions. The edet  (usus)  settles criminal affairs on the principle of the law of blood. Avaria formerly extended far beyond the limits we have 

indicated; for,  towards  the end of the eighteenth century, the Khan Omar raised tribute on the Czar Heraclius  11.

of Georgia, on the Khans of  Derbend,  Kouba, Bakou, and 

Chiva,  and on the pasha of  Akhaltzik;  but in consequence of the events which have occurred, and which we have already mentioned, the power of Avaria has almost va-nished. The chain of  Daghestan  forms three distinct divisions. The western side is  composed  of uninhabitable rocks,  co--

w r e d  with oak and beech trees. The table land  of the middle offers fertile plains, watered by impetuous torrents, -

and producing magnificent pasturage. Sterile  steeps  ex-tend along the sea; but they contain saline lakes,  whit%' 

are very useful to the Nomad  Nogais,  who  are wandering  '

in those deserts.   

> DAG 1 ESTAN

# . 161 I n complesion and features the Lesghians differ from other tribes. They  are  commonly fair, with blue or grey eyes, and  appear  to be a northern race.  They  are, in general,  tall,  but not so  v-ell  shaped  as  the  other  Circas-

sians.  Thiclr  brows and  wrinliles  on the forehead seem to add to their martial  deportment.  Their round hairy caps, their pelisses of sheep's  skin,  with the tail  worlred  into a pocket,-garment3  which  they never lay aside, not even in summer,-gire them a savage  appearance. The Lesghians are more partial to Persian than to  Cir-

cassian costumes.  They  manufacture a kind  of knitted cloth, of  escellent  wear,  which  is procured eveu by Russian officers. The habitations in Daghestan, as throughout all the eastern Caucasus, are called  sakliu;  and are constructed with  unhemn  stones, cemented with clay. The use of mortar is  unknown  there,  and therefore  dmellir~gs do not offer the least resistnnce to Russian cannon  balls,  unless they are  I~erred in the rock. Beneath the flat roofs open-ings are constructed for the purpose  of  firing through them. The  windows  are turned  inside,  looliing  on agallery. These  saltlis  are  oblong squares with  two  sto-ries. Towers are numerous there, as in every other part of  the  Caucasus, and are  used  for the defence of the  Iiabita-

tions.  There are court-yards, but very close to one another, and the streets are excessively narrow. Tbe use of panes of glass is unknown, except at  Djengoutai,  where  the castle of the Khan of  hlekht,ouli  is provided with that piece of agreeable  luxury.  Gardens  are  very  numerous, and  rich 

in a variety of fruit trees. Those gardens, formed on rocks, proclaim the extraordinary perseverance of the inhabitants ;

for the enrth has often to be brought from a  g m ~ t iliztance 

x162 THE  CAUCASUJ. 

on asses'  b::c!cs.  One  sees  narrow  enclosures rising  one 

above the  otl~cr, lilce  so many  stcps.  Apricots are abun-dant, and sell at eighty  kopcclcs  assignat-a sack. There are oblong and  purple  apples, of  ezccllent  quality; and grapes  mith  which  very  good champagne  might  be made. But the gardens are not near so numerous in those parts of the  Caucasus  that are less rocky. Horses are scarce, but there are numerous  small  asses, very vigorous and  excellent  to carry loads. The Lesghians are almost the  only  people i n the Cau-casus  whu  do not speak or  u:derstand  Tartar. Their dialect  differs  from all other  Circassian  languages, and its pronunciation is very difficult, as European languages are wanting in the sounds requisite for the utterance of Lesghian words. 

lJTomen  are secluded in the  back  saklis.  They  are less elegant and less  careful  of their persons than other  Circas-

sian women,  who  believe they  m ~ u l d commit a sin did they not assiduously cultivate those charms bestowed upon them by nature.  Lesghian  women are  not  so handsome, and they do not practise ablutions so frequently as  Adig-

hian  women. They take the veil when  trelve  years old-I  m e m  they begin at that age to conceal their faces; but they are coquettish enough to  allow  a curious  eye  to scan on apart of their features. 

Matrimoliy  is but a kind of sale and purchase. The sum which the suitor has to pay the father for the value of the young girl,  is  always much discussed, and that money is  called  ka6en.  On the eve of the  med-

ding the  tmo  parties go to the bath, and take their meal separately. On the morning of the nuptials the friends of the future husband go  ta  the girl's home to receive the be-trothed,  v h o  plays  a little  comedy,  and  prctenrls  she cannot part with her dear parents.  Romver  she is  placed 

on  a- donkey,  when an  attendant  of  tl;e  bridegroom  takes 

oE  his  gird12  and  lays  it  on  her. That is the beginning of the  end,  and  everythiug  else goes on smoothly. The Lesghians, in spite of the Koran,  aud  of  Shamyl 

himself, are addicted to smoking. They even  manufacture 

very pretty clay pipes, embellished with  silver  ornaments. They are also skilful manufacturers of elegant vases, over-laid with silver, The  dmellings  of the rich are usually in the middle of the  salili,  a column i n carved  wood  stancling opposite  the 

window. Cushions, cloths, and garments, are placed on boards. The floor and the  walls  are covered with wool or grass carpets, exquisitely  worked,  and chimneys are sunk in the wall, being  almost  imperceptible. The mills and bridges of the Lesghians deserve peculiar attention.  V a t e r  is not collected by means of dykes, but is carried by a canal to the height of the  lid1  roof, thence through a narrow  vood  conduit i t falls under the mill, and sets in motion a small horizontal wheel, which is provided 

with  eight or ten wings,  and  to which is attached a cylin-der, which makes the stone turn; but there is no cog-wheel. Those canals, which serve also to irrigate the fields, extend three or four  verts,  and raise the  water  scveral 

fathoms high. But the soil, uneven everywhere, is very 

favourable  to the execution and working of those artificial streams. Arched  bridges  throw Russian engineers into despair. Unable to sink piles in impetuous torrents, they are  re-duced to the necessity of imitnting the Lesghians,  who 

construct a bridge in the following manner : -having 

obstructerl  the stream  rrith  stones,  a3  f , ~zs  to  the  place 

where it  cxrics  away  the  largest, they lap a row of beams, which  &end  a thiid  longer than the  dyke.  They cover those beams with stones, and then  they  lay  a second  and  a

third wooden row, until all  the  space is covered fully  and 

smoothly. By these means  bridges  of considerable  flexi-

bility are raised; but they are sufficiently strong to bear the heaviest loads, such as Russian cannon. There is no iron in the country,  and  none is ever em-ployed in the erection of  salrlis  or of towers. The absence of that metal, and the  want  of long trees, render it impos-sible to construct bridges on any other plan. If rocks, through  the  industry of the Lesghians, have been rendered fertile, i t must be expected that the plains and the valleys are cultivated with extraordinary care. I n fact, land is there  escessively  valued, and the division of property goes  niuch  beyond the system which alarms the economists of Prance  and  Switzerlmd.  There are owners of ground the size of  only  two  or three fathoms. Nay, 

the  landed property of some men is said to be hardly so large as a cloak ! Hence it is reported that a mountaineer was one day  unable  to discover his field, having covered it with his  bourka,  mhich effectually concealed it. Vestiges of Christianity are not found at all in Daghestan,  

> as

they are in the other parts of the Caucasus. With regard to  the  A~arians,  they are but indifferent  Mussul-

mans. Divine service is performed among them in the Arabic language, mhich is not even understood by the 

Mnllahs  themselves. The religion of the Lesghians has undergone a complete 

metsmorphosis  since the clomination of  Khasi-31 onllah. 

The fundamental  principlc  of  their  religion  rlom  is to  lo\-e 

independence, and above a11 to  hate  the  llussians. 

The inferior classes are especially  taught  the precepts of the Koran, for the  Murids  are naturally inclined to observe them, as they are  giftcd  with  ecstacy  and enthusiasm, through which  they  are freed  from  n-orlclly  pre-occupations, and are placed in direct contact  with  the Deity. The 

Naibs  or governors of provinces are possessed of that 

facuIty  to a higher degree; yet to the second prophet alone Allah reveals himself. That faith has originated in  Suphism,  mhich,  from Arabia, has  penet.rated  through Persia to Daghestan. I t is Iess a religious than a moral, and in some  measure  apolitical code. That philosophical system holds materialism in contempt, but it is not over favourable to  spiritndism. 

I n fact, according to  Suphi,  the  founder  of the  doctritie, 

happiness does not proceed  fiom  the mind. That  trutll 

might be usefully taught i n our modern societies, where intellectual pursuits produce so much uneasiness. Retaliation is, in Daghestan, carried probably to agreater extent than in any other part of the Caucasus. Even Corsican vendetta  falls  short of  Circassian  vengeance. Certain families in Daghestan have,  fiom  time  aImost 

immemorial, been engaged in a deadly struggle for mutual destrnction. An offence or treason is visited with ven-geance, and that retaliation, which is punished i n its turn, superinduces a series of cruelties perpetrated successively by both parties. The Russian government has  as  yet done nothing to repress that destructive propensity; on the contrary, it has turned i t to its  own  advantage; for those who are offended apply to it for the destruction of their enemies. A Russian captain,  who  commanded the district  Welikent,  on the  road 

from Derbend to  Risliar,  lent, in 1836, his  residence  to  the 

princes of the  family  of  Ihitach,  f x  their  mutual  ~hllghter. 

The vestiges of the fight are still shown in  a small  room 

where i t took  plzce,  and where  tllirteen  persons were murdered.  Elcler-Bey,  it is said,  had  repudiated a woman, and her brothers swore to avenge the  decd.  Moreover, 

Cetz-Bey,  of  Kaitach,  had been exiled to Siberia, through the accusations of an  uncle  of his,  who  had  been killed by his brother; so that it mas retaliation or thirst for ven. geance that led to one of the most extraordinary massacres on record. 

Hovever,  money or  cattIe  is accepted as compensation on many occasions. Sometimes, in order to restore peace 

betmeen  two  families, children are transferred, in order to equalise the number of victims on both sides, and those children are wantonly  and  unmercifully murdered. Shamyl has done everything in his power t o uproot and render execrable that law of blood which ravages  the  ra~lks 

of his warriors.          

> RUSSIAN A R 3 I C S I . i .
> The different Snnlcs of the Armenims-Their Origin-Conqnest of Cyrus

# -Introductlou  of  Cilristinnitr-Sciiism-Extinction  of the  limgs-           

> Dominntion of the 'u-sians-Snrdnr Houstein-Emigration-The Patri-
> arch of Euhmindzin-Insurrection a t Erivan in IS4G-The Armenian
> Language-Ararat-Lakes-Climate.

THE Armen  of  thc  Greeks are issued from Aram, one of the most ancient  liings  of Armenia. The Armenians themselves call their  couztry  Haisadan;  that is, the country of the 

Haikhs,  after  the  name of  I-Iaig,  their first  king,  who came from  Babylon  about  t\~-enty-two centuries before the 

Chrisiian  era. The Georgians give to the Armenians the name of 

Somekhi,  on account of the  province  of  Somhth,  which is situated near their frontiers. The Armenians are a remote branch of the  Indo-Ger-

man race. They were,  t o ~ a r d s the beginning of their history, conquered by  the  Assyrians,  u d e r  the following circumstances  :-Semiramis,  unable to  win  the love of King Ara,  who  was remarkable for his wonderful beauty, declared mar against  him.  That monarch was  killed  in the  battle  11y  his  orrn  roil,  mil  tllc  Assyrian  queen,  having 

become  mistrcss  of  Armenia,  foundcd  the  tower  of  Van.* 

With  the conquest of  Assyria,  Cyrus  brought Armenia under the domination of the Persians. The Armenians, 

who  followed the  Chalclean  religion, under the Assyrians, adopted the  Pcrsian  ~vorshi~>, through  the  propaganda  of 

the magi; and fire-worship still holds i n Armenia a more powerful sway than  in  any other Christian country. It is reported that a Chinese colony, led by Prince 

Mamkon,  a Chinese fugitive, settled in Armenia.  The 

Jews came also there in considerable numbers, and through them several Sabeian customs  m r e  introduced into the Armenian rites.  V i t h  ?rfithridates,  and especially  mith 

the Romans, the paganism of the  Greeks  penetrated into Armenia, where  Anatid  or  Anaitir,  that is, Venus or Diana, became the object of great veneration. St. Bartholomem, the apostle, is  reported  to have first 

preached  Christianity in Armenia ; but it mas Gregory, the 

illuminer,  who succeeded in  introducicg  it there, in the third century. The Armenians preserved the orthodox faith till the year 

596,  when, under  the  patriarch, Abraham I.,  and  at the council of  Tovi11,  they  separated  themselves from the 

Greeks,  condemned the council of  Chalceclonp,  and pro-nounced in  firvour  of one single nature in Christ. The schismatics were henceforth  called  Gregorians, and had four patriarchs,  whose  head,  v i t h  the title of Catholicos, resided, and still resides, in the convent of Echmiadzin, which now belongs to Russia.  Many  Armenians remained and are still Roman Catholics,  aclinomledging  the pope as the head of their church. 

## * Noscs  of  Khorey  m d  Diodorus  of Sicily. The Araseides reigned in Armenia for about 580 years; but the family of those  princes  became extinct  mith 

drdashir,  the last of them, and  Armenia  passed under the Persian domination. The Bayroudites  afterwards  re-esta-

bIished  the Armenian monarchy, but the last of  them  died in 1308, and Leon, of  Lusignan,  s brother to the king of Cyprus, was raised to the Armenian throne. The sway of the  Lusignan  family was not of long duration. The last of those princes was expelled from his throne by the Persians, and died in Paris in  1397.* 

Armenia, after having been invaded by the Persians, the 

Turks,  the Arabs, and ravaged by the Tartars, under 

Tlmour,  remained finally the prey of the Persians and the Turks, who divided the country among themselves. But, i n  1827,  Paskiewitch took  Erivan,  and Persia yielded to Russia the province of that name, as  well  as the territory of  Akhitchuvan. 

There was at  Erivan  a viceroy,  Koussein  Sardar,  whose fate shows the instability of human greatness in the east. All his property  was  confiscated by the Shah of Persia, in order to pay the expenses of the mar, and he died in astable at  Ispahan.  His  widow  returned to  Erivan,  in the expectation of recovering his property, but she was reduced there t o such a depth of distresg that a negro, who mas her servant, was obliged to beg bread and onions for her. Madame  Chopin,  the wife of the vice-governor, came to her relief, it is true; but snch delays were resorted to in the proceedings through  nhich  she mas to regain her property, that she died before anything had been settled. 

Russia,  occupying a part of Armenia, carried on a reli-St. Martin's c' Armenian Chronicle." 

> Y

170  T H E  CAUCASUS. 

gious  propaganda throughout the country, and spared neither gold nor promises to the inhabitants  to 

emigrate. More than 8,000  families,  that  is about 40,000 individuals, set out from  Xdcrbaidjin  for Russia, under the leadership of  LaznrefT;  but the greater number of those 40,000 emigrants died from want and suffering on the road. The patriarch of Echmiadzin, henceforth appointed  by 

Russia, made it his study, for the purpose  of  pleasing the government, to alter  the  Armenian  rite, and to render it similar in everything to the Greco-Russian. However, 

Erivan  did not submit quietly to the Russian domination. An attempt at insurrection was tried there, in  1846,  but it was soon crushed. The Armenian language, with its alphabet, composed of 

thirty-six  letters,* bears no likeness  ~vhatever to the Turk-

ish, Persian, and Georgian languages. There are two distinct dialects in use among the Armenians, the  written 

language,  called  Grapal;  and the vulgar language,  known 

under the name of  Ashmapar.  Those two languages differ  

> so

widely, that the knowledge of the one does not in the least assist in  uuderstanding  the other. Armenia is overrun by several chains of monntains, amongst which me may mention the  Chaldean  and the dark mountains called  Netten.  The highest of all is the Ararat, which the Armenians  call  Masis  -mother, or 

Agridagh. 

There is the  small,  as well as the great Ararat. The latter is 16,200 feet high, according to Parrot, who mas  the  first who ascended it, on the 23rd of September, 1830. He 

* A certain  Mesrob  is said to be  the  inventor of the  drmenianlanguage. 

found there no ark, but a plateau, where it might have 

rested. The Armenians, who believe that  no  man m i l l ever have the privilege of treading upon their sanctuary, have always stoutly denied the  redity  of that ascension, and even suc-ceeded in making the Russian government doubt the fact asserted by the professor of Dorpat. But at length the ascension of BI. Autonomoff has proved the truth of Parrot's statement. The lake of  Sevang  is 5,000 feet above the level of the sea, sixty-four versts long, and thirty-two broad. A small 

island,  with  a current of soft-water, rises above the surface of that lake. The  water  of the lakes of  Vare  and  Tebriz  is salt.. The climate of Russian Armenia is severe, and there is snow during the whole month of April; some has been seen there even in June; while the heat in summer is 

excessive  at  Elivan. 

As there is a great scarcity of mood, the inhabitants are very ill provided against the intense cold, to mitigate which they build  stables  in the middle of their dwell-ings, and burn cow-dung. T h e following historical fact mill  give  an idea of the cold that prevails there in minter. I n  1808,  General  Crudomitch,  after having in vain blockaded  Erivan,  was compelled to raise the siege and depart; but  on  the  road  he was assailed by such intense cold that he lost half of  his  army.  But  we  must add that at that time there was not the fine road which  now  leads from  Erivan  to  Tiflis. 

The soil produces excellent liquorice, and the rhubarb is not inferior to that brought from India. Orange and lemon trees grow in those parts more  favourably  situated. 172  THE CAUCASUS. 

The common people are well satisfied with  Russian 

domination, but the nobles preferred the Persian  govern-

ment, as under it they enjoyed more licence. Armenia  is 

a country so backward, that it necessarily must derive  some 

advantage from its union with Russia. The Armenian princes, of whom there are a considerable 

number,*  are not acquainted with the use of the  things 

that are  most  essential to life, and nothing can be more 

repulsive  than, for instance, the  town  of Achetetivan. 

# * There are in  Colchis  3,000 princes. Among the  Kdmucks  any one                   

> who is possessed of aflock of sheep is called prince. Vith regard to tho
> Russians, all tho members of the same famiIy are called by the same title.

# CHAPTER  XV. 

FACTS  AXD  FICTIOXS.        

> Prisoners-Taganof-Cossocli Ivan-A Kourinski Soldier-The Prisoner of
> the Caucasus-by the Count

X.  de  Maistrc-by  the author-by Poushkine 

- Brigands - Abdoulah-Bey  -The grateful  JIullah  - Lermontof -

> Ismael-Bey.

# THE situation of the Russians, detained as prisoners by the Circassians, being one so very  affecting  to every sensible mind, could not but  forcibly  attract the attention of literary men, and it is really of a nature fully to repay the attention of the reader. Truth is so truly interesting here, that invention loses its charms, and the collection of facts becomes a most interesting study. Count Patocki, in his travels,  speaks  of  M.  Taganof,  aRussian officer, who was  made  a prisoner  by  the  Tchetche-

nians  when on a journey t o meet  his  father. Being of the family of the  Dimers,  of  Nogai  Krasnai,  he was treated better than others, and his knowledge of the Tartar lan-guage contributed much to allay his misfortunes. Women especially interested themselves much in his fate, and he mas often admitted into their company,  when  his chains were  taken  off.  After  six mouths detention he  mzis  ex-174  THE  CACCASUS. 

changed for a  Circsssian  prisoner, and thus obtained  his 

liberty. Taitbout de  Xarigny  saw at Anapa a Cossack, Ivan,  who 

was  taken prisoner in an incursion made by the  Circas-

sians  on the  ICouba,  against  a colony of Russians, of  which 

he had been one. He remained a long  time with a  Circas-

sian  prince, who made him  work  at  the  ground, and wished that h e should marry a  Circassian.  As  he,  how. 

eyer,  declined this  offer  (a strange  refusd  on the part of  a

Cossack), he was shut up  n i t h  his fair bride, and had to marry her at any rate. To avenge the bad treatment  df 

his master, he shut him up in his  own  house, set fire to it, and fled with his  wife  to a mountain, whence he looked  with 

delight at the inroads of the fire he had kindled. He then went to another prince, an enemy of his late master, and  took  him for a  Koniali.  This master treated him well, from gratitude for having rid him of his enemy. Sold and resold an immense number of times,  Ivan  at length reached Constantinople, and thence came to Anapa with a Turkish darha. 

A soldier of the regiment of Hour was a prisoner of the 

Lesghians,  and mas only released by his regiment, which constituted a portion of the  expedition  of 1837. H e used to tell that, in the same  aoul,  there was a deserter, who had embraced  Moslemism,  but who,  mhene~er he  saw  him, 

asked  for the cross, which the Russians wear on their breast, which he kissed,  regretting  that he had changed his creed. But the most interesting recital is that of Count  Xavier 

de Maistre, who relates, in his  usual  charming style, what had been communicated t o him by a Russian officer.*                 

> :, Lcttrcs sur lo Caucasus," published in 1812, contain the eamc talc,
> but vrittcn less partially. FACTS A Y D

FICTIONS.  175 

Major  I<ascombo,  of Grecian origin, in  proceeding  to  the 

port of Lars, to  take  the command,  mas  accompanied only by about  Sfty  Cossaclis.  The  Tchetclie~lians having  been informed of this rash  procceding  by their spies,  cietermiued  to make him repent it, and attacked him with greatly superior 

nnmbers.  Half the Cossacks mere killed, and the others, making a bulwark  of  their  dead  horses, resolved to sell their lives dearly,  when  a Tchetchi.nian,  who  lruew  the Russian  Iaugnage,  or a Russian deserter, cried out,  ''  We do not  iutentl  any ill to you; deliver to us your  major,  and 

go in peace." The  major,  on  hearing  this,  adrarxed,  of his  own  accord, and surrendered, not wishing to prolong the effusion of blood.  Rardly  had  he clone so,  when  a

Eussian  corps appeared to  sulpport  him, but the  Circassians 

hastened to escape  with  their prisoner. The soldier who served as a domestic to the major, Ivan Smirnoff, not wishing to separate his lot from that of  his  master,  went  t o meet him among the Circassinns, where he  succeeded  in rescuing him from captivity. The two prisoners were sent to a very  distant  aoul, and confided to the guard of  Ibra-

him, an old  Tchetchen,  KILO had lost two sons i n t h e 

battlcs  againat  the Russians, and who delighted i n  having 

found an occasion t o avenge his misfortunes by ill-using the prisoners. The  Tchetcllenians  demanded 10,000 Russian roubles for the ransom of the major,  who  wrote several letters on the  suhject,  but it seems that the Russian govern-ment then followed the policy of not ransoming their pri-soners, in order that the Circassians might  r,ot  be tempted to 

make  them. Ivan endeavoured to allay the  hea~~iness of his chains, by teaching his master how to make Russian viands and drinks. The major amused himself by singing to the guitar, and the  Tchetcl~enians, who  take  great delight in 176  T E E  CAUCASUS. Russian songs, asked him often for a repetition.  Ivan 

danced  the  Cossack,  and  thus still further succeeded  in 

pleasing his captors.  Whcn,  in fine, the iman of the  soul 

stated to Ivan that, if he changed his religion, they would not keep him in irons, this faithful servant  underwent 

circumcision for the sake of having his hands free  for  the 

dclirerance  of his master. To remove any doubt of  his 

sincerity, he accompanied the Tchetchenians in one of their expeditions beyond the  Tcrek.  The Circassians were repulsed, and as Ivan wore his cap as a policeman, and his military surtout, he served as a target for the balls of the Cossacks, mhich, however,  luckily  only injured his clothes. 

At  the passage of the river he saved the life of a Tchetche-

nian, who swore to Ivan eternal amity,  sad  whose  sisters soon informed him that a plot mas laid for his life, as he mas feared and mistrusted. The Circassians went on a new  expedition,  and Ivan made an oath either to die or save himself that very night. 

As  he was not allowed to  speak  to the major, they commu-nicated with each other by singing. That night there was much music, as they had a great deal to say to each other. At length Ivan  knockecl  Ibrahim into the fire, near to  mhich  he was sitting, so fiercely, that he never rose again. His  wife,  who  came running at the smell  of 

Ibrahim's beard burning in the  fire-pIace,  Ivan also killed,  m i t h  her child,  who  might have betrayed  them  by his cries. The key of the chains of the major was not to be  found  i n Ibrahim's pockets, so they had  to  escape  as 

well as they could. Ivan assisted and finally carried his chief until reaching a hut, where they found some refreshment. Having recovered his  composnre,  he succeeded in liber-ating the major of his irons. They had followed a road in  a   

> FACTS A N D IFICTIOXS.

177 

coutrary  direction to  that  it mas supposed the Circassians would follow in their pursuit.  They  had reached the height of  the  mountains. They perceived  already  the plains occupied by the Russian armies, but  Rascombo, 

eshausted  by  estremc  fatigue, could  uot  proceed further Ivan, therefore,  proccedecl  alone  to an  aoul,  snbject to the Russians, where, selecting an isolated hut, he promised the owner 100 silver roubles if he mould  scrve  the major; but they mould  uot  let him  go  without an escort, and at the sight of the soldiers  the  liormalc  of the major threatened to kill him if the Russians proceeded one step further. Ivan explained the mistake, and the Circsssian demanded that he should place the money st the door. H e seized it and 

fied,  leaving  ICavcombo  in the hands  of  his liberator.  Thus 

concluded a slavery of eighteen months, during mhich the simple soldier played the real part of the chief.  When 

the major  arrived  at the Xussian fort, he resumed his  epau-

iettes  and married,  while  the soldier mas made a petty officer, in which position he remains, thanks to the Russian law, which retains even men  of talent in the grade i n  mhich 

they mere born, and affords the  noblc  alone the privilege to serve his country with all his inborn faculties. 

W e  could not, after so touching a tale, mention our own Prisoner of the Caucasus,"* considered  especially  under the point of one of St. Petersburg society. But we can-not speak mith sufficient praise of the poem of  Poushkine, 

who portrays, with perfect art, the habits and customs of the Circassians. 

# " What do you think of, Cossack? Don't thou recollect the great battles, the bivouac in the midst of a noisy 

* 1'  Rcasinn  Sketches,"  Doiils  ii. 175  T H E CAUCASUS. encampment, the cries of victory of the regiment?  Illusive 

dream ! Farewell to the free  Stanilzns,  the paternal  roof, 

the quietly running Don, and the rosy girls  ! The  hidden 

enemy approaches the banks of the river. The arrows  fly 

from his quiver : it flies, and the bleeding Cossack  roils 

down from the hill  !" 

Love, holy love, has just broken the chains of the prisoner of  Poushkine.  I t is because, at that time, there existed yet love in the heart of the Tchetchenian  towards 

the  Eussians,  but now there is only hatred. Next to the condition of slavery, that of the brigand may most attract public attention, because, if it has dissapeared even from 

our  taIes  and romances, it yet exists i n the Caucasus,  a d

the princes even do not scruple to exercise i t publicly. The  Eussians  could never conciliate Abdoulah-Reg, the son of the Kadi of Tabassaran  ; and it mas another prince of Daghestan,  3Iohammed-Khan,  who endeavoured to acquire the good graces of  the  Russians, and recover the princi-pality of  Utemey,  which his father had lost by  breaking 

the  dlegiance  which  he  had sworn to the Russian  general 

Radaboff. H e demanded and obtained powder from the Russians, mith which he undermined and blew up the house of the brigand, containing his family and guests. Government rewarded him by  allowing  him the revenue of several  aouls,  and  by  giving medals to his companions. Even later they received some money, although some regret was expressed at the innocent having perished mith the  bauilty  !

All is not shade in the  Circassian  character  ; it possesses its fair traits.  Roniter  Wagner has known, at  Tekahe-

rinodar, a German physician, attached to the military hospital, who  had  been twice  degraded  to be a soldier, for    

> FACTS A X D F I C T I O N S .

179 

being concerned in a duel. The  Circassians  asked often 

tbr  his aid, but they  pay  rather  in  pro~kions than  ia 

money. After a desperate battle the soldier-physician found amongst the  dead  an old Circassian, who  showed 

signs of life.  H e  had him conveyed to his house, and  by  the care of him and his  wife  the wounded man recovered. He was a Mullah, and made his escape as soon as he could march. Sometime afterwards a child came to seek the doctor, to visit  n sick person. The physician soon per-ceived that it was the  i\Iullah,  whom he had saved ; never-theless he kept him i n his house, and treated him with kindness and rewards. It was at this time that the  Tcher-

kesses made an excursion towards the  stanitza  where the doctor lived. The expedition succeeded perfectly,  and  all the inhabitants of the Cossack village, who had  not  been killed, mere made prisoners. The doctor  would  assuredly have shared the same fate but for the assistance of the Mullah, who saved him by some stratagem. He appeared to con-sider himself thus acquitted towards the German,  who 

never heard of him again, although he took some pains to renew his acquaintance. The Caucasus has found a poet in Lenmantoff, exiled to that country for having sung the death of Poushkine, killed i n a  due1  at St. Petersburg, he himself perishing by the same death, i n a single combat. The reader mill, no doubt, be well i n c h e d to hear some of his Circassian lyric strains. 

ISXAEL-BEY. 

# " This is really a nature uncomprehended, and which does not even understand itself.. A mind in travail and 180 T H E  CAUCASUY. 

in strife, Providence, at  the  same  time, dispersing and pro-voking i t ; who  plays  with  the heart of  woman,  a d  with 

the heads of the  ecernp  like  reeds." The nature of the poet has depicted itself in this impe-tuous character; but the Russian censorship has  often 

arrested the flight of his pen; otherwise he would have depicted the  injusticc  and cruelty of  this  war, where the Russian bayonets respect neither the child i n its cradle, nor the old man at his hearth; where blood mixes with fire-death with conflagration. How many  aouls  clevas-

tated, rebuilt, and  again  destroyed ! However this  may 

be,  Lermontoff  had the tale  which  follows, from an old inhabitant of the mountains :-

# '( Before the dews of morning had left the  gounri,  aTcherliess cavalier followed on horseback the narrow path which leads near Bechtan,  t o ~ s r c l s the  Elbrous.  H e had passed that mountain, and soon came i n sight of the 

Schattgora."  His charger foamed  with  fatigue, and the sun shone on a fine but  mild  country. The horseman perceived a light,  towards  which he hastened, and  Innocked  at the  door  of a little hut. The  head  of the family, the father of  thrce  sons, who followed the profession of brigands, opened the door; but he gave his hand to the stranger, who could henceforth count on his hospitality. A maiden appears, who seems to delight heaven and earth.  Ismael 

becomes confused  ; the eyes of the Peri dram sparks from his heart, which had been hardened by sufferings. B u t he triumphs over  this  sentiment, and when, at his departure, Sara fetches his charger, which she  had  well  attended and 

caressed,  the heart of  Ismael  beats. Still he mounts his 

* The  glacier  of  Elbrouae. 

horse, and is about to start, when'  S3m  s a ~ s to him,-

## ' TVllcrc  art  thou  going  to ? T O  ju&e  from  thy  lorig 

beard,  thou art a strauger,  ~ e r h a p s all  esile;  here we are, distant  froin  every  cianger  ; remain nith us.' ' D o not 

thinli  me  insei~siblc, Snra, but the  hand  ~ 1 1 i c h has  ehed 

blood is not worthy to press thine. My heart; has  emptied 

itself in hatred,  and  lips which  curse  are not deserving to press those  r0.y  lips of thine. I am  the  brother of  Yoslam-

Bey  !'  He had  badly  spoke  thus  when  t!ie  footsteps of his horse fell on the  cars  of  Sara,  lost in  snrprise. 

# (' To detact a  brother  is horrible, but what  does  not ambition  produce  in the heart of man, and, still more, its detestable companion-hatred.  k-~sl>~rn-Bey mas envious of  Ismael.  H e  ruled  alone  o w - his subjects. The re-turn of  Ismael  had reduced his  pover.  I n  a council of 

way,  Yoslan-Bey  prepared to surprise the enemy, but 

Ismael  answered,  that he did not fight by night, but in the broad day,  and  his  partizans  detest his  brother  and  follow 

him. At the  head  of his friends  Ismael  performed deeds which  mabe  the mountains  ' of a thousand  piclrs,)" 

resound  with  thc  fame of his  valour.  One  day  he  met  a

strange warrior,  who  said  that he was searching for  Ismael-

Bey, for  thc  puypose  of killing him, as he had  imposed 

~ p o u the faith  cf  a young  maiden. The prince led  hirn 

towards  a rock.  ' He  whom  you  seek,'  he exclaimed,  ( is 

sufficiently punished by destiny. Pray for him-he  suflers  ;

but, if you  want  to  kilI  him, he is before thee.' So  much 

greatness of mind overpowered  the  warrior  ; the  lex  talionis 

mas silenced within his breast, and he left  Ismael  ~ ~ i t h o u t 

having  put  his  hand  t o  his  cutlass. 

* It is  thus  that tho  eastern  nations of  all  times  have  appeliated  thc     

> chains of the Cauwsns mountains.

18.2  THE CAUCASUS. 

"Another  warrior,  however, followed, not to combat 

with  him, but to fight by his side. H e did not  knom  him, 

but loved him as his brother. His name was  Selim,  and 

his courage manly. By the chances of war, the gallant followers of  Ismael  were  decimated  ; the forest of Russian bayoneteers broke into the forests of the Caucasus, into the nearly impenetrable mountains and the aouls.  Ismael 

struggled vigorously; his sword wrought wonders; but afriendly hand turned the bridle  of  his horse, and they fled before superior numbers. Selim was mortally wounded, and  Ismael,  in trying to alleviate his suffering, discovered that his friend was a moman,-Sara, who had followed him in battle, and had so bravely fought at his side. A

kiss  seals their love-the first and the last-the kiss of avowal, and of farewell.  Ismael  revives  with  the expiring sigh of  Sara. 

# " T h a t  remains for him to he done on this earth, but to die by the hand of a brother, to be cowardly  murdcred 

behind a rock, Yoslam-Bey is to expiate cruelly the incon-stancy of love; and to close, gloomily, a life of glorious strife. What a legitimate wrath could not accomplish, hatred effected at last, and Yoslam-Bey fires his pistol at his brother."  

> "

Auol-Dchemet is great and rich. He does not pap tribute. The battle field is his mosque. Steel and cou-rage are his ramparts. His free sons, tried in more than one hot battle, are known throughout the Caucasus. The ball from their hands never misses its aim. A Russian heart and terror march before them in battle. FACTS  A N D  F I C T I O N S . 183 

The  clay  inclines towards its end, the rocks exhale a hot  vapour,  everything  sin!is  to rest,  and  there is no life but in the  aoul.  On an open place, at the  foot  of a moun-tain, from which escapes a torrert, men placed closely in a circle, according to the custom of the land, listen attentively. How mill the council decide? I s a new stroke in contemplation? Are the herds of the enemy to be plundered? Is the Russian  army  espected?  I s a n invasion prepared? Pity and sorry are deeply en-graved on the features of all  the  Cusdines.  A n  old man, i n a strange costume, a Legshian, bending under the weight of years, is seated in the centre of the circle. The  words  uttered by him are hasty, and his black eye becomes, at times, animated and lustrous.  

> '<

# ' God,'  said he,  ' had given me, in my old days, three sons and three daughters. The storm has deprived the tree of its branches. Struck by a terribIe  misfortune, Iam to-day altogether lonely in my grief, like a naked tree in the plain. Oh! unhappy are my old days. My beard is whiter than the glaciers, but often even under the cover of cold snow murmurs  the  sound of a warm heart. Help me, Chevalier de Dchemet-lend me the assistance of your heroism. Which of you  Itnow  Bey-Boulat? 

W h o will return me my daughters?  M y  other daughters are also slaves, for I knom  not where they are gone. To the father remains, therefore, but one child. The sons have been slain i n battle,  two  have remained in foreign lands, and I have seen the youngest die too soon the death of a hero.  When  he  fell, his eye beamed as if he  saw,  i n a lustrous  rainbow,  the houris of Danarline  smiling  at him. I retired then t o solitude,  taking  my last child with me. She grew u p under a faithful hand, and all I had was centered in her.  Besidcs  her nothing was left to  mc  but 

my  armnur  and  my  gun. I had been driven from  my 

homely hearth,  nly  goods  were taken, and I n~ysclf found 

in a  gap  of  thc  mountains  a shelter against the  enemy.  Isoon learned to bear misery-freedom I had  known  for a long time-when fate  t001i  m a y  from  me, i n my old age, her who  alone  had embellished my life.  

> "

'One night,  when  I mas  plnnged  in a deep slumber, my angel watched at my side,  ~vafting coolness over me 

with  a green branch. I at~olre suddenly. I henrcl  myself 

called by name-a subdued  and  tremulous  voice sounded i n my ears,  li?x  the sound of  horses  whose steps begin to fade i n the distance. Where is  my  child 2 0, God ! she 

is lost. A horseman flies  with  furioix  haste,  and has carried her off. I discharge my musket, the  ball  does not reach  its  object, and now see me here, my heart broken, impatient to avenge the outrage,  and  pravers  and maledic-tions are alike vain.  Like  a snake trampled  upon  by the hoof of the horse, I wander,  old and suffering, through the mountains, I can find no rest by either day or night, since this terrible event. Help me, Chevalier of Dchemet ;

lend me your heroic assistance.  Vhich  of you know the Prince Bey Boulat, who will return me my daughter." 

"'I,'  shouted a warrior. He places his hand on his large dagger, and all become silent, and look at the hero, astonished.  'I  linow  him, and I shall aid thee ! Never, i n his life, has Hadshi mounted his steed i n vain. Wait for me two nights; but i f I do not come then,  wait  no more to hear of me; thou  mayest  then return home, and pray the prophet for thy soul  !' 

"The  day breaks in the mountains,  giants  of granite look afar amongst the mist,  and  the  mhite  summits rise PACTS A N D FICTIONS.  185 

towards the blue  vaidt  of  the  heaven. The  cold  breath  of 

:he  morning breathes from the precipice, and the  clouds, 

like  -white  and red sails,  rise  towards the summits of  the 

mountains.  h Circassian,  on horseback, rides cautiously along the  precipice.  I-Iis  charger, once so fierce, marches slowly,  vith  measured steps. The  dew  yet covers rock  and 

dale ; the sun shines on the  horseman,  who soon slackens the bridle, plays  with  his whip, and begins to  make  the air resound  ~ i t h the song of ancient times,  ~ h i c b the rocks re-echo. On a side-may  he sees the traces of carts,  and 

under his feet shines an  aoul,  in the brightness of the morning  sun.  Herds browse ; the noise of the village rises in the distance. He  recognises,  distinctly, the residence of Boulat-Bey, situate on the right of  a rocky  range. At the door of the house is  seated  the lovely young  Lesghian 

maidell,  looking towards the road and the plain. What is it that moistens her burning cheek? 0, speak, fair star 

of  the south, for whom  gloas  thy heart  f d l  of warmth? 

Dost  thou see thy  brother3  return-awaitest thou a distant friend ? She inclines her head, as if tired of waiting; her breast heaves, as if moved by some sweet passion. Her cheek reddens, the southern blood has risen there. A

magical  enchantment  moves on her lips;  ererythiug  in her burns  with  a tremulous  ardour.  H e r hands tremble as if they wanted to seize some one. Suddenly she rises, and becomes agitated. The step of a horse makes the rocks resound ; the dust rises  ; a horseman drams near.  ' It is him, no doubt,'  exclaims  she,  fidl  of joy. 

# " Hope easily sharpens our eyes, and changes our sight. The horseman approaches. 0, fatality! It is a stranger; she does not  know  him. H e comes to find  an asylum 

under her roof. But he does not come near;  he  does not 

2 A186  T R E CAUCASUS. quit his saddle. His look wanders about in fear. Who can inspire him  with  fear ? 

> "

'Why  doht  thou hesitate,' saps Leila?  ' dismount from 

thy  horse  ; repose  tL7self;  a guest sent by accident is agift of  God.  If thou he poor, I am rich. I will fetch thee honey and  koumeis.  I will that thou should bless the home of Bonlat-Bey.' 

# " Leila, may God protect thee. Thou receivest thy 

host  SO  well,  that he must bring thee a blessing. Thy father sends thee  his.' 

## " ' 3Iy  father ! Oh  ! I have been separated so long 

fiom  him. Has he not forgotten his absent daughter? Where does he stay? His daughter  knows  where he is-he lives as he lived before. Is he happy ? I s he contented ?

Speak.'  

> "

'Who buries himself  alive-who  has borne such strokes of fate-who has been driven from his home, and has not where to put his head in security; to whom nothing is left-can he be contented? But thou,-art thou happy  1' 

## " 'Yes, I am happy. I want nothing.' 

## " ' 0 ! misfortune  ?'  

> "

'What  sayest  thou  ?' 

# " ' Nothing.' 

# " The stranger becomes silent, leaning his head on the 

tabIe,  and does not touch any of the meal laid before him. Serenity has left his forehead, which becomes covered with furrows. Are they the effect of time or of sorrow?  

> c'

Leila will console her guest; she takes her tambou-rine, she sings and dances; her eyes shine like stars, as she moves about, stoops, and rises. His breast moves, a voluptuous delirium runs through his frame. She    

> PAACTS A S D F I C T I O S S .

187 

moves before her guest like a butterfly  bcfore  a ray of the sun. At one time she throws her instrument in the air, seizes it again, and makes it turn and jump by her white fingers ; then again she puts it above her head, and follows it with her eyes, which she  then  fiscs  on the stranger, as to say, 'Leave off thy sorrow, and believe me that happi-ness and misfortune are but dreams on this earth.' 

# " Leila,' says  Hadchi-Abneli,  ' cease to dance and to sing; arrest the impetuous feelings which  e ~ l i v e n thee. How, does sorrow never await on thee ? Does the image of death never  turd  thy thoughts from this joyful life  7' 

# " ' Why  should I tllialr  of the cold  gmre,  as I am happy on this earth.' 

# ''  'Dost  thou  nerer  feel thyself attracted  tomar,rrls  thy fatherland-the misty laud-towards the  Daghestan,  with 

the blue  sky  ?' 

# " ' I love these mountains, these clouds,  and  these gla-ciers. The world is fair everywhere, not only where we were born. The heart finds its fatherland where happi-ness and love are; it bears gladly the bonds that attach it to love, and forgets itself easily in  mhatcver  it loves; like the bird it flies away, and  makes  its nest wherever it  Likes, 

free in the beauteous world of God.' 

# " ' I t is but those who preserve a faithful recollection of past happiness who mill find a sweet consolation in their hearts,  when  that happiness has passed away. Images pass and change in us; one effaces the traces of the other; one remembrance pursues the other; love becomes pain, and enjoyment a crime. That which pleases us flies from us; the chains which  carchsed  us melt away, and what we have repulsed comes  back.  Leila ! Leila! for all the world I would not have this false happiness * * *

What is it-thou  appear&  palc!' " ' Hear me one moment, Leila. I dlsoon conclude. I had a brother; he is dead; so  fate  milled it, not like  

> a

hero, in open battle. He mas secretly murdered by thecriminal arm of thy  husband.  Li!<e  a wiId  beast  he 

expired  miserably through the assassin's ball, without  know-

ing  ~ h ovas  his foe. But in death he imposed upon me  the  debt of vengeance. After many years I have found his enemy.  N y  dagger was drawn upon him. But what  then  is death, thought I, after the pains I have suffered? Should one single last moment avenge the sufferings I have endured? No, there are more cruel evils than that. He  must  have some one he loves. Ishall find and strike him dead ! My  wish  is at last accom-plished  ; the  awful  hour has come, and my vengeance is unfailing.  Seest  thou the setting sun? I t is time, I see my brother, and his glance of death-it is time, I hear his voice.  When  I snm  thee to-day, for the first time, 

playing  and  dancing, thy lot excited  my  pity, and I felt a great pain; but I have overcome this feeling. I t is vengeance  done  which animated all my thoughts. 0, 

Allah  ! I shall keep my oath.' 

## " She became pale as  snow;  all her limbs trembled; she fell at his feet ; she  wept  and  embraced  his knees, saying,  ' 0 ! do not look at me with that gloomy aud menacing eye,  which  quite appals me. Thy words per-vade my blood like cool poison. Do not joke.  Dost 

thou think of assassination? Your look is cool-cruelly cool.  Oh,  heavens ! turn away his arm. Does the tears of innocence  not  move  thee. Tell me, h o w do they  weep 

in thy country to excite pity? Thou wilt  kill  me, and 

## 1 shall die-so young, so happy. Oh, pray thee, stop! Have pity!  Hast  thou never been so happy in thy life as to  low,  and has  thy  heart never been moved ? No, no.' PACTS  A N D  PICTIONY.  189 

"His  mouth  remains silent; prayers and tears do  not 

touch him.  ' Let me yet live one hour-one  single 

moment !'  

> "

The blade has flashed, and mith one  stroke  he has severed the head from the body.  Haclchi  wipes it  mith  the long hair of his bourkn; then he jumps on his horse, with his bleeding and inanimate victim.  A miraculous fright scares the animal; he recoils at the burden imposed upon him, gnashes his teeth, champs the bit, his mane rises, he beats the ground with his hoof, and  will  not start. Neither  word  nor bridle can quiet him. At last he turns, and,  like  an arrow, flies  towards  the mountains. 

# " The Aurora of the evening begins to be  pale,  soon it 

mi11  recede to obscurity;  $.loomy clouds menace all around to dispel the last ray of light. They forbode a storm. The torrent grumbles, and rolls  on  at the foot of the rocks. Lonely horseman, spur thy steed, and envelop thyself in thy bourka.  Why  does thy foot tremble in the stirrup ? Move thy whip, draw thy  bridle  closer !

No spirit of the mountains-no savage beast threatens thee, nor  folIoms  thee ; thou  canst  yet pray; nothing dis-turbs thee; pray, then!  

> <(

Courage, my horse ! Whence comes thy trouble ?

Here, shines the mail of a serpent; there, rocks under-mined by the torrent  hang  in the air. How often have I , in the heat of battle,  tainted  thy mane mith blood; 

how  often, in my days of  misfbrtune,  hast  thou saved me in  tile  uproar of the fight, or in the desert, and  hast 

safely  brought  me home ? Why  draggest  thou me to-day like a  heal-y  burden? Go on, then,  my  good  animal; 

soon shall we repose ourselves at home. I shall then cover thy harness with more Russian silver, and shall let thee browse with the herds, without thy saddle.  Only 

to-day thou must trot swiftly. Hardly  hast  thou carried me a  few  hours,  and  thou art already covered all over  mith 

foam,  and  respiring so heavily under me  ? What  is it  that 

impedes thy course 7 Darkness  retires, the moon  appears, 

and projects silvery rays through the  clouds  ; she makes us perceive the land where our aoul reposes in security.  See  !

the fires of the shepherds shine in the meadow  like  stars. It seems to me that I distinguish in the distance the braying of the herds of Dchemet ; the horses hurry to come and meet us, as if they felt from a distance that we bring misfortunes along mith us. 

## " ilround  Dchemet, the night had wrapped every-thing in a deep slumber. Only a lonely old man sits watching,  near  the road, on a white stone, and seems as 

motiorless  as  a mmument.  He  gazes silently, but  full  of 

expectation,  on the road which leads from the  rocky 

valley, and a deep sorrow shines in the steel of his fixed eyes. 

((Who  is the  horsemzn  mlm  descends at the foot  of 

the rocks mith so much precaution ? His fatigued steed 

bows  his neck mith its  long  mane. He has taken off his 

bourka,  he  holds  it in his hand, and carries in it something 

caretidly  wrapped  up,  and  the old man says to himself, 

# ' Perhaps he has concealed in the garment some presents from my beloved daughter.' 

# " Already the horseman has approached the old man. H e stops his horse, he opens the folds of  the  bourlra  mith his .trembling left hand,  and  the bleeding head escapes 

and  falls in the tufty grass. Good  heaveus,  the  old  man 

recognises  the  head of his own child. Almost  depriverl  of his senses, he presses  the  beloved head to his mouth ; hcr    

> FACTS A Y D FICTIONS.

191 

featwes,  cool and bleeding,  receive  the  last  utterings  of 

sorrow, and a kiss escapes with  his  lifc.  Xisfortunes  hacl 

sorely tried  that  unhappv  heart.  He  brolie  like  a thread 

of decayed flax, and on his forehead, motionless  like  lead, lay heavily  engraven  wrinkles.  The  soul had fled so 

swiftly  from him,  that  expectation,  vhich  had animated him, remained impressed on his moribund features. 

# " Hadchi-Abnek  remained for a moment motionless, then, with the utmost speed of his horse, he fled precipi-tately to the mountains. 

# * * 3 * * *

# " About a year had elapsed,  when,  amongst brambles and rocks, two corpses were found in a carern,  nearly 

half decayed; but crime was yet visible on their faces, turned towards each other. They mere extended on the ground, as if they had been fighting. I t appeared to the pilgrim, who found and subsequently buried their corpses in the mountains,  what  might have  becn  an illusion, that life was yet active in them, that their threatening mouths were opening, and that their eyes became enlivened, as for some savage and ferocious deed. 

# " The vestments of both were rich. The one mas Prince Boulat-Bey. No one could  recopise  the other."
