# The Chinese Islamic "Goodwill Mission to the Middle East" During the Anti-Japanese War

Dîvân  DİSİPLİNLERARASI 

ÇALIŞMALAR DERGİSİ 

cilt 15 say› 29 (2010/2), 133-170 

# 133 

# The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill 

# Mission to the Middle East” 

# During the Anti-Japanese War 

Wan LEI 

Associate Professor, Fatih University 

Abstract 

This article narrates the publicity activities of the “Good -

will Mission to the Middle East” of the Hui delegation 

dispatched by the Chinese Huijiao (Islamic) Federation 

during the late 1930’s and summarizes its contributions 

to the victory of China’s Anti-Japanese War. Such people-

to-people diplomacy initiated by the Hui people, an Is -

lamic minority in China, possesses great significances in 

many ways including developing the friendships between 

China and the Mideast countries. This matter is however 

neglected by many researchers in the same field. 

Key Words:  Goodwill Mission to the Middle East, the An -

ti-Japanese War, Chinese Huijiao (Islamic) Federation, 

Hui people, Diplomacy. 

I. Sino-Foreign Relationships in 1930’s 

The relationship between China and Japan was de -

teriorating from the late 1920’s onwards. The economic expansion 

of Japan following its national imperialist policy of extending and 

protecting its colonial markets in China initially caused conflicts 

between the two nations. The Japanese damaged Chinese eco -

nomic and commercial interests, and then the movement to boy -Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 134 

cott Japanese products played a leading role for the Chinese to pro -

tect themselves. 1 Following the economic conflicts were military 

skirmishes. In 1931, the Japanese imperialists staged the 9-18 (Sep -

tember 18) Incident in Manchuria with an attempt to turn China 

into a colony of Japan. On the second day, the Japanese army oc -

cupied Shenyang, capital of Liaoning. Within four months, it con -

trolled the whole of Manchuria. This was the real start of World War 

II. 2 In 1932, the Japanese established the ex-Qing emperor Pu Yi 

as the head of the puppet regime of  Manzhouguo  (Manchu State). 

In 1933, the Japanese, coveting Northern China, moved across the 

Shanhai (Mountain-and-Sea) Pass. The Chinese resistance did 

not stop the Japanese from further invasion. In 1935, the Japanese 

pressured China to sign the He-Umezu Agreement, which forbade 

China’s Nationalist Party from conducting operations in Hebei 

province. In the same year, the Chin-Doihara was signed, expelling 

the Nationalist Government’s administration from Chahar prov -

ince. Then the Japanese-backed East Hebei Autonomous Council 

was established in November 1935; the Mongol Military Govern -

ment was established in May 1936; thus the Japanese had virtually 

controlled North China in 1936. 3

A clash occurred between Chinese and Japanese troops near the 

Marco Polo Bridge of Wanping county of Hebei province (presently 

Fengtai District of Beijing), marking the start of open and total war 

between China and Japan. The national crisis pushed the National -

ist Party and the Communist Party to ally with each other for the 

second time. Actually, from 1927 when Chiang Kai-shek started to 

slaughter the communists in Shanghai and established his anti-

communist government, 4 the struggles between the two parties                               

> 1Cf .“The Anti-Japanese Convention” in The North-China Herald , July 28,
> 1928, p. 152, and “Effects of the Boycott ”in The North-China Herald ,De-De -
> cember 19, 1929, p. 529.
> 2This is the viewpoint of John B. Powell. See his My Twenty-Five Years in
> China ,New York: The Macmillan Company, 1945, pp. 182-92. Many Chinese
> historians share the same opinion .
> 3Zhou Ruihai. Zhongguo Huizu kangri jiuwang shigao (Huizu History of
> the Anti-Japanese and National Salvation in China ). Beijing: shehui kexue
> wenxian, 2006 , pp. 3-5. Jin Dexing ,Zhongguo geming shi ,1840-1956 (The
> History of the Chinese Revolution ,1840-1956 ), Kaifeng: Henan University
> Press, 1987 , pp. 254-58.
> 4The anti-Communists raids and executions were carried out in a large scale
> in the first two years of 1927 and 1928. See an example in “Communists in
> Liang Hu Provinces ”in The North-China Herald , March 17, 1928, p. 424. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 135 

had never stopped. The Xi’an Incident in December 1936 was an 

important episode of modern Chinese history. It took place in the 

city of Xi’an during the Civil War between the ruling Nationalist 

Party and the Communist Party. On December 12, 1936, Chiang 

Kai-shek was suddenly kidnapped by Marshall Zhang Xueliang, a 

former warlord of the Northeast, in order to pressure him to fight 

against the Japanese instead of fighting against the Communists. 

The incident led to a cessation of hostilities between the National -

ists and the Communists so that the two could put up a united front 

against the increasing threat posed by Japan. The CCP played a role 

in the peaceful settlement of the Xi’an Incident 5 and the forming 

for the second time of a Nationalist-Communist alliance, thus pav -

ing the way for a nationwide war of resistance against Japan. 

From the 9-18 Incident in 1931 to the fall of Wuhan in Central 

China in October 1938 was regarded as the first stage of the anti-

Japanese War, i.e., the strategic defensive period, before the strate -

gic stalemate and strategic counter-offensive stages; during which 

period the Japanese Army occupied Northeastern China (Manchu -

ria), North China, and parts of Eastern and Central China, and the 

people in these regions suffered bitterly. The notorious “Nanjing 

Massacre” also took place during this period. 

The Western powers carried out a tolerant policy toward Ja -

pan. One can see such policy through the Geneva Assembly by 

the League of Nations from September to October of 1937 and the 

Brussels Assembly in November of the same year. The Sino-Japa -

nese war was discussed in both assemblies; the former assembly 

had no practical outcome, while the latter was worse -Japan re -

fused to attend the assembly and the assembly ended with noth -

ing- no support was made to China and no punishment imposed 

on Japan. The United Kingdom and the United States did not want 

to stimulate Japan because they enjoyed benefits from bilateral 

trade with Japan; maybe the war would bring additional interests 

to them. France was fully occupied with the Spanish Civil War that 

she was not able to turn around and had little attention for the Far 

East. In a word, the Brussels assembly can be described as one that 

had produced a worse outcome than had it never been held -- all 

the western countries seemed weak and powerless; they made ex -       

> 5Cf. Chiang Kai-shek, A Fortnight in Sian: Extracts from a Diary ; and Mail-Mail-ail -
> ing Soong Chiang (Madame Chiang Kai-shek), A Coup D ’etat ,Taipei: China
> Publishing Company, 1986.

Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 136 

cuses to each other and shifted responsibilities onto one another. 

They ingratiated themselves with Japan, which in practice encour -

aged Japan in aggression against China. 6

China had to fight for herself independently. Diplomatic efforts 

with the big powers were still in need; at the same time, any means 

to win the international sympathy and international understand -

ing seemed unavailable under such background. The Chinese peo -

ple became aware of the importance of the publicity on their own 

behalf. The following article was a reflection of such awareness: 

“Apart from the diplomacy used by the government, we need the so-

called “people-to-people diplomacy” to fill in the blanks of the gov -

ernmental diplomacy; because, when the governmental diplomacy 

reaches its deadlock, or proves to be a hindrance, the singular auxiliary 

means is the “people-to-people diplomacy” to break such deadlock 

and clear its way. People-to-people diplomats can be representatives 

of some cultural organizations or participants from the people, and the 

government and the people’s organizations can dispatch them jointly. 

They may go to the international world to communicate...Our resis -

tance against the enemy needs all supports and backups from govern -

ments and the people of foreign countries; we must make big efforts for 

such diplomacy so our publicity can go abroad widely.” 7

II. Who Are the Hui and the Japanese Policy towards Them 8

The Hui is a minority people in China. The ancestors of the Hui 

were predominantly Muslims in Central and West Asia and mi -

grated to China since the seventh century. The Hui in China is a 

6 Qi Shirong,  “Zhongguo Kangri Zhanzheng yu guoji guanxi ” (China ’s Anti-

Japanese  War and Sino-Foreign Relations) in Liu Danian, ed.,  Zhong Ri 

xuezhe duitan lu -- Lugouqiao shibian wushi zhounian xueshu taolunhui 

wenji  (Paper Collection of the Sino-Japanese  Scholars’  Dialogues -- In 

Memory of the 50th Anniversary of Marco Polo Bridge Incident ), Beijing 

Press, 1989, pp. 232-35. 

7 Mu Letian , “Guanyu jiaqiang guomin waijiao ” (About Enhancing the 

People-to-People Diplomacy) in  Yue Hwa , vol. 13, Combines Issues 10-12 

(Guilin: April 25, 1941), p. 12. 

8 The self-designation of the Hui people are  “Hui Hui ” or  “Huimin ” (“Hui 

man ” or  “Hui people”), which are  abbreviated  as  “Hui ”; other people also 

called them Huijiao ( “Muslim ” or  “Islamic”  people) during the Republican 

era. Presently, they are officially called  “Hui Hui Minzu ” or  “Huizu ” simply 

(Hui Hui ethnic group). This article will not translate these terms when 

using citations in references and in notes. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 137 

singular group of people; they speak Chinese, but appear to have 

pursued a unique cultural evolution following the genesis of their 

immigration into China. The period of immigration was predomi -

nantly during the Tang (618-907) and Song dynasties (907-1279). 

There were two routes for them to enter China -one by the South 

China Seas to Canton and another by the Silk Road. 9 During that 

period, Islamic Persians, Arabs, and Turkic peoples came to China 

to trade and later a number of them became permanent residents 

of such coastal cities as Guangzhou, Quanzhou, Hangzhou, Yang -

zhou, and the capital of Chang’an (today’s Xi’an). 10  Apart from 

these people, the majority of the Hui were the people that the mili -

tant Mongols armies brought about into China. During the Mon -

gols’ westward expeditions to Middle and Western Asia, they con -

quered many countries and kingdoms, and turned the local people 

into militant men, and sent them eastward on military missions. 

The Mongol rulers grouped them into “tan ma chi jun”, viz, the 

five Mongol tribal armies led by their chieftains when the Mongols 

conquered the Jin dynasty (1115-1234). 11  These civilians-turned-

army men settled down in various locations, mainly in cities and 

along vital communication lines at the time. They bred livestock 

while maintaining combat readiness. As time went by, they be -

came ordinary farmers and herdsmen. Because of their similar ac -

tivities, a common economic life began to take shape among them. 

Scattered as they were, they stuck together in relative concentra -

tion in settlements and around mosques that they built for them -

selves; this has been a distinctive feature of the distribution of the 

Hui population in China to the present time. 

As the ancestors of the Hui Hui were people who came to China 

from places where social systems, customs and habits differed from 

those in the new land, they began to promote their own in-group 

consciousness. Their concentration with mosques as their social                 

> 9“Mohammedens in China ”in The North-China Herald , January 18, 1933,
> p. 116.
> 10 Cf. Ma Jian-zhao ,“The Role of Islam in the Formation of the Culture and
> Economy of the Hui Community in Guangzhou” in Journal Institute of
> Minority Affairs ,vol. 16, no. 1 (1996) , pp. 31-39. This article focuses on
> the research of the earliest Hui communities in Guangzhou, which can be
> taken as an example of the conditions of the Hui ancestors in many cities
> in China at the time.
> 11 Xia Zhengnong, general-ed. ,Ci Hai (Ocean of Words ), Shanghai cishu,
> 1989 ,p. 795. Wan LEI

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 138 

center, their increase economic connections with each other, and 

their common political and social destiny and their common belief 

in Islam brought about their consciousness. Islam played a pow -

erful part in their political and economic systems. “ jiao fang ” or 

“Islamic community” was a Hui community with a mosque built at 

a location inhabited by the Hui people, ranged in size from a dozen 

to several hundred households and with an imam presiding over 

the religious affairs of the community. Each community operated 

quite independently from the others. These communities become 

the basic social nexus for the widely dispersed Hui people. Until 

the early Ming dynasty (1368-1644), along with the nationwide res -

toration and development of the social economy, the distribution 

and economic status of the Hui population were solidified, and 

their shared ethnicity was eventually formed. Another factor that 

contributed to the formation of this ethnic group was the Chinese 

language. Before the Ming, the Hui used Persian, Arabic, and other 

Central and Western Asian languages. In the long course of time of 

living with the majority Han Chinese, they increasingly spoke the 

Han language and maintaining certain Arab and Persian phrases; 

until finally, the characterization of the Hui Hui culture by influ -

ences from the traditional culture of Middle and Western Asia end -

ed with its assimilation into the Han culture. 12  Such Persian and 

Arabic phrases are not regarded as religious phrases only, nor are 

they the Chinese variation or slang, or borrowed words, but a part 

of the Hui language that is acceptable by all the Hui in China. 13 

Islamic communities established an early Hui pattern of preserv -

ing and protecting their identity in the form of enclaves, which were 

ensconced within the dominant Han society. There are three fea -

tures of a Hui community: everyday life is associated with mosque; 

the imam is in charge of religious affairs; and the  xianglao  (elders or 

councilors) are in charge of communal relationships. The Hui today 

are living in a way little changed from their strong tradition. 

The Hui suffered a lot when the Japanese army invaded China. 

Japanese war policies included first the “killing policy”. In a Hui-

clustered village in Gaocheng county of Hebei, the Japanese cap -

tured twenty Hui men among whom they only set two younger 

men free through “redemption’, and buried alive the other eigh -      

> 12 Bai Shouyi ,Zhongguo Hui Hui Minzu shi (The History of China’s Hui Hui
> Minzu ), Beijing: zhonghua shuju, 2003 ,p. 106.
> 13 Ibid, p. 106.

The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 139 

teen Hui men. 14  In Mengcu n village of Hebei, the Japanese killed 

more than 1,300 Hui people within three years of their occupation 

of that area. In Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Hubei, Hunan, Guangxi, Guang -

dong, Sichuan, Chongqing, Shaanxi and Henan, they destroyed 

many mosques and killed numerous Hui with the bombs of fight -

ers. 15  Statistics showed that the Japanese destroyed 220 mosques 

and killed countless Hui people by April 1941. 16  During the no -

torious “Nanjing Massacre” at the end of 1937, “the dead bod -

ies were laid bare in mosques”. 17  From February to March 1938, 

when the Hui and imams who survived the massacre returned to 

their mosques, they found  Xijie  (Western Street) Mosque outside 

Zhonghua Gate destroyed. Other mosques, like  Caoqiao  Mosque, 

Taiping  Road Mosque,  Hanximen  Mosque, and  Changle  Road 

Mosque, were filled with dead bodies. Two imams, Wang Shouren 

and Zhang Zihui, proposed to establish a team for burying the 

dead; another four imams actively responded to this immediate -

ly. They organized a team very soon, and, with the assistance of 

a Hui working in the puppet government, successfully applied to 

register a name as “Nanjing Huijiao Team-for-Burying”. The team 

consisted of a group of Hui in charge of Islamic rituals, the sec -

retariat, grave-dig ging and corpse-carriage. 18  To avoid the danger 

14  Ma Yuhuai,  “kangzhan zhong de Ji zhong Huimin ” (The Mid-Hebei Hui 

in the Anti-Japanese War) in the Nationalities Affairs Commission of He-Japanese  War) in the Nationalities Affairs Commission of He-War)  in the Nationalities Affairs Commission of He-in the Nationalities Affairs Commission of He -

bei Province , e d.,  Huizu kangri douzheng shi lunji  (Collected Articles of the 

Hui’s Anti-Japanese Struggles ), Shijiazhuang: Hebei renmin, 1991 , p. 7. 

15  “xuezhai tongji ” (Statistic in the feature  “Bloody Debts ”) in  Zhongguo Hui-Zhongguo Hui -

jiao jiuguo-hui huikan  (Bulletin of  China Huijiao National Salvation Fed-China  Huijiao National Salvation Fed-Huijiao National Salvation Fed -

eration ):  vol. 1,  issue 5 (December 15, 1939), p. 22;  vol. 1,  issue 8 ( February 

1, 1940), p. 28;  vol. 2, combined issues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29; vol. 2, com-vol. 2, combined issues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29; vol. 2, com-ol. 2,  combined issues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29; vol. 2, com-combined issues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29; vol. 2, com-ombined  issues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29; vol. 2, com-issues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29; vol. 2, com-ssues 6-7 (July 1940), p. 29;  vol. 2, com-vol. 2, com-ol. 2,  com-com-om -

bined  issues 10-11 (September 1940), p. 37;  vol. 3,  issue 6 (April 1941), p. 45. 

16  “kangzhan zhong Huimin sunshi gaikuang ” (A General Survey of the Hui ’s

Loss in the anti-Japanese War ) in  Bulletin of the  China  Huijiao National 

Salvation Federation , vol. 3,  issue 9 ( July  1941), p. 7. 

17  See  “Memoir of the Huijiao Team for Buying when Nanjing Falling into 

the Japanese Occupation ” in  Nanjing Commission for  Historical  Data  of 

Nanjing  People’s Political Consultative Commission , ed.,  qin hua Ri jun 

Nanjing da tusha shiliao zhuanji  (Historical Data on the Nanjing Massacre 

by the Invading Japanese Army ), n p.,  printed in 1983 , p. 34. 

18  Unfortunately, relative documents and bills were burn down at the 

beginning of the  “Cultural Revolution ” in 1966. See  “Memoir of the Huijiao 

Team for Buying when Nanjing Falling into the Japanese Occupation ” in 

Nanjing Commission for  Historical  Data  under Nanjing  People’s Political 

Consultative Commission , ed.,  qin hua Ri jun Nanjing da tusha shiliao 

zhuanji  (Historical Data on the Nanjing Massacre by the Invading Japanese 

Army ), np.,  printed in 1983 , p. 34. Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 140 

of being killed at any moment, they cooperated with the “Nanjing 

Red Cross Society” and kept working with their banners and arm -

bands. The corpses were difficult to process, as nobody had buried 

them immediately. They buried more than one hundred bodies 

that were recognizable as Hui in five cemeteries around the city in 

a period of more than one month. 19  Another example was on No -

vember 23, 1938, when the Hui were celebrating the festival Al-Fitr 

after Ramadan, the Japanese fighters dropped more than eighty 

bombs on them, destroying four Mosques and causing more than 

130 casualties of the Hui. 20 

The second Japanese policy was economic oppression. For ex -

ample, jobless Hui people in Jilin province who lived in the cities 

or towns with more than 5,000 people numbered 25,000 or so. This 

number included 60% of the total Hui population in the province; 

most of them faced no crisis in their living. However, when the Jap -

anese started invaded all of China in 1937, the poverty-stricken Hui 

population increased to 18%. 21  This percentage kept growing, and, 

by 1943, three prefectures in this province, namely, over twenty 

counties under Changchun, Yanji, and Tonghua, amounted to 

38%. 22  When the traditional economic structure was dismantled, 

the mosques became destroyed, and Hui communities shattered, 

numerous Hui became homeless. Sangpo Hui Village of Mengxian 

county in northern Henan province had 2,000 Hui people before 

1937. By 1939, some had died and others escaped to other places 

for survival, so only 600 were left. 23  Another example was the Hui 

transportation between Beiping (Beijing) and Dengkou of Ningxia 

province which provided camel transportation for various goods 

conducted by the Hui businessmen. After July 1937, the Japanese                    

> 19 Ibid, pp. 34-39. Original remark of the article: This memoir was edited
> by Yang Weiren based on the oral accounts of the imams, Ma Zihe, Shen
> Xi ’en and Zhang Deyi in a symposium in 1966 in Nanjing, who had their
> personal experiences during the time.
> 20 Shen Junping, “kangzhan zhong de Shaanxi Huizu ”(The Shaanxi Hui
> in the Anti-Japanese War) in Collected Articles of the Hui’s Anti-Japanese
> Struggles , Shijiazhuang: Hebei renmin, 1991 , p. 71.
> 21 Ma Hongchao & Tian Zhihe ,ed. ,Jilin Huizu . Changcun: Jilin jiaoyu, 1984,
> “Chapter 2-3”, p. 42.
> 22 (Japan) Hajime Kobayashi, Hui Hui , Tokyo Bowuguan, 1940, pp. 296-98 .
> 23 “Yu bei huoxian qian shao de Sangpo cun ”(Frontal-Castle Village Sangpo
> in the Northern Henan) in Bulletin of China Huijiao National Salvation
> Federation ,vol. 1, issue 3 (November 1, 1939), p. 29.

The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 141 

came and established “transportation cooperation”, thus trucks 

took the place of camels; consequently, several thousand Hui men 

lost their jobs and awaited their doom. 24 

The third policy was the deliberate humiliation of the Hui. The 

Japanese army men rubbed pork fat on the mosques, and forced 

the Hui to slaughter pigs to “reward” the Japanese soldiers. The 

Japanese forced pork into the mouth of a Hui in Hebei. 25  The mat -

ters of “rubbing pork on mosques” happened not only in Hebei, 

but also in Jining and Dezhou of Shandong province, 26  and Wuy -

ang county of Central China’s Henan. 27  The puppet Wang Jing -

wei’s government army committed the same crime in Wuyuan 

Mosque in Suiyuan province. 28  They “recruited” Hui girls into the 

so-called “Huimin Girl’s School” to train them as “geishas” and 

“singers”, but the girls became sex slaves. 29  For military purpose, 

the Japanese did not hesitate to destroy Hui cemeteries. 30  Many 

available sources reveal the brutality and violence of the Japanese 

against the Hui. 

24  Yang Jingzhi, “Ri Huijiao zhengce zhi quanmao” (An Overall Perspective 

of the Japanese Policy on the Huijiao), originally in  Tu Jue  Monthly , vol. 8, 

combined issues 7-8 (Chongqing: 1942). See Li Xinghua and Feng Jinyuan, 

ed,  Zhongguo Yisilan jiao shi ziliao xuan bian  (Selected Data on the Islamic 

History in China, 1911-1949 ), Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 1985, p. 1791. 

25  Compiling Team of Mengcun Hui Autonomous County, ed,  Mengcun 

Huizu zizhi xian haikuang  (Survey of Mengcun Hui Autonomous County ), 

Shijiazhuang: Hebei renmin, 1983, p. 42. 

26  Liu Chun, “ri kou miewang Hui Hui minzu de yinmou” (The Japanese Plot 

to Conquer the Hui Hui Minzu) in  Xin Zhonghua Bao , July 28, 1939. See 

Jia Ruimei and Guo Lin, ed.,  Shaan-Gan-Ning bianqu minzu zongjiao zil -

iao xuanbian  (Selected Historical Data on Minority and Religion Affairs in 

the Shaanxi-Gansu-Ningxia Frontier Region ), Xi’an: Shaanxi renmin, 1991, 

p. 211. 

27  “dibing dui Huimin zhi baoxing” (The Brutal Crimes the Enemy Commit -

ted against the Huimin) in  Bulletin of China Huijiao National Salvation 

Federation , vol. 3, issue 5 (March 1941), p. 25. 

28  “xi Sui fen hui Wuyuan qingzhen-si” (The Wuyuan Mosque in Western Sui -

yuan Destroyed by Fire) in  Bulletin of China Huijiao National Salvation 

Federation , vol. 2, issue 5 (June 15, 1940), p. 25. 

29  The school was established in Zhangjiakou of the present northern Hebei 

province. See Qiu Shusen, ed.,  Zhongguo Huizu shi  (The Huizu History of 

China ), Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 1996, p. 805. 

30  For instance, for a railway scheme, the Japanese were ready to destroy a 

Hui cemetery in Shanghai in October 1939. However, there was no con -

sequent report. See “Mohammedans Object to Cemetery Move” in  The 

North-China Herald , Oct. 11, 1939, p. 61. Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 142 

The fourth policy was to e mploy the singular traits of the Hui by 

the Japanese in its “permanent control” over the Hui. By grasping 

these “traits”, they fueled an “Islamic upsurge” in Japan. The Japa -

nese military government, through activating its organizations and 

research centers on Islam and the Muslim World, scheduled a big 

number of publications, particularly in the period between 1937 

and 1945. These publications concerned about many Hui related 

topics such as the conditions of the Hui in Mongolia, in Northwest 

China, and in Northern China; the mosques and the Hui way of 

life; the Hui economic backgrounds and communications; and 

Hui-Confucian relationship; and so on. A number of these articles 

had no significance in doing “study” or “research” work, but were 

simply propaganda. 31  Simultaneously, in the occupied regions of 

China, the Japanese established successive puppet Hui organiza -

tions, and published and distributed numerous bulletins, pam -

phlets, and bills for propaganda. A Japanese Muslim director of 

Manzhou Huijiao xiehui  (Manchurian Huijiao Association) was 

established in 1936, replacing the earlier  Xinjing Yisilan jiao xiehui 

(Islamic Association of the New Capital) which had been estab -

lished in 1933 with ten branches among the occupied provinces 

and 182 sub-branches in cities and counties of these provinces. 

These associations worked to render services to the Japanese and 

the puppet Chinese government; they also published several bul -

letins to advocate “Japan-Manchuria friendship”. 32  They estab -

lished  Tianjin Huijiao-hui  (Tianjin Huijiao Association) and the 

Beijing Huijiao-hui  (Beijing Huijiao Association) in 1937 to “pro -

mote Hui welfare and pacify Hui society”. The former was entirely 

a temporarily scrabbled society with which many members of its 

council ignorant of the society at all; the latter was short-lived, 

existing only for two months. In December 1938, the Japanese 

organized a “North China Hajj Team to Mecca” whose real pur -

pose was making publicity for the Japanese. 33  In 1939, Japanese                   

> 31 Lu Zhonghui ,“Review on Japan’s Islamic Studies of China” in Researches
> on the Hui ,issue 3 (Yinchuan: 2000), pp. 95-96.
> 32 Yang Jingzhi, “Ri Huijiao zhengce zhi quanmao ”(An Overall Perspective
> of the Japanese Policy on the Huijiao) in Tu Jue Monthly ,vol. 8, combined
> issues 7-8, 1942. See Li Xinghua and Feng Jinyuan, ed ,Selected Data on the
> Islamic History in China ,1911-1949 , Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 1985 , pp.
> 1786-88.
> 33 Ibid, p. 1782.

The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 143 

spies established the “Guangzhou Huijiao Association” in the old 

Huaisheng  (Pr ophet’s Remembrance) Mosque. 34 

The fifth policy was a Japanese ambitious plan to establish a “Hui 

Hui State”. The “Hui Hui State” ( Hui Hui Guo ) is a topic not well 

researched in Hui studies. “In the late 1930s and early 1940s, the 

relationship transformed into a major Japanese military strategy 

as the Japanese government began to implement its Islamic policy 

by mobilizing Muslim forces against the United Kingdom, Hol -

land, China and Russia in East Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Middle 

East.” 35  After the establishment of the so-called “Manchu State” 

(Manzhou Guo) in 1931, the Japanese supported the establishment 

of the “Eastern Hebei Autonomous Council” by the end of 1935, 36 

and the “Mongolian Federated Government of  Mengjiang ” in 1937. 

Another notorious agent was the puppet National Government in 

Nanjing headed by Wang Jingwei, 37  which the Japanese hoped, 

eventually, would take over the place of the authentic National 

Government led by Chiang Kai-shek in Chongqing. The Japanese 

imperialists seemed to have found a way to splinter China. 

Having occupied Baotou in North China, the Japanese set up the 

puppet “Northwest China Huijiao Federation” in October 1937. 38 

In 1938 when a Japanese intelligence organization was exposed in 

34  Zhou Ruihai , Hui zu  History of the Anti-Japanese and National  Salvation in 

China , Beijing: shehui kexue wenxian, 2006, p. 38. 

35  Selçuk Esenbel, “Japan’s Global Claim to Asia and the World of Islam: 

Transnational Nationalism and World Power, 1900-1945”  in  The American 

Historical Review , vol. 109, no.  4 (October 2004 ).  Available from: <http:// 

www.historycooperative.org/journals/ahr/109.4/esenbel.html> [viewed 

April 15 , 20 10 .] 

36  It was established on Nov 25, 1935. It covered 1,000,000 sq miles making 

up 1/4 the entire territory of that province and  controlled  4,000,000 people. 

See  “East Hopei Regime ” in  The North-China Herald , April 14, 1937, p. 45. 

37  Popularly called by historians as  “Puppet Wang Jingwei ’s Government ”.

It was established on the New  Year’ s afternoon  of 1938. See  “Puppet 

Regime Established in Nanking ” in  The North-China Herald , January 

5, 1938, p. 2.  The first three  articles  which Wang Jingwei agreed with the 

Pact the Japanese proposed were: one, to acknowledge Manchuria as an 

independent state; two, North China would be semi-independent; and 

three, Inner Mongolia would be a  “special area ” in which the Japanese had 

the right to station its army. See  “Terms of Wang ’s Reported Pact with the 

Japanese ” in  Straits Times . Singapore: March 7, 1940, p. 14. 

38  “Diren cedong Xibei Hui bao zhi zhenxiang ” (The True Purpose of the 

Enemy to Instigate the Hui in Northwest ” in  Bulletin of  China Huijiao Na-China  Huijiao Na-Huijiao Na -

tional Salvation Federation , vol. 3,  issue 7 (May 1941), p. 26. Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 144 

Ejina in western Inner Mongolia, many documents and files were 

discovered related to the creation of disturbances in the North -

west. 39  They created many problems among the peoples of Inner 

Mongolia and Xinjiang so they could reap unfair gains. The Japa -

nese pushed even more strongly for the establishment of the “Hui 

Hui State,” calling upon the Hui people to “break off from China 

and establish their own state”. There were two opinions about 

the regions of the “Hui Hui State” inside Japan’s Kwantung Army 

(which controlled Northeastern China at the time). One opin -

ion insisted on building a greater “Hui Hui State,” ranging from 

southern Tarim Basin in Xinjiang along the north line of the Qilian 

Mountain of eastern Gansu province to northern Shanxi province. 

This covers roughly the entire present Northwestern China and a 

part of Northern China. A second opinion seemed more practical, 

holding the idea of first establishing the state in Ningxia and Sui -

yuan provinces before expanding it into a larger territory. 40  To ac -

tualize the plan for this “Hui Hui State”, the Japanese tried to find 

a proper person as an agent to persuade and convince Ma Hong -

kui so they could overcome Ningxia first. This plan was not real -

ized, however. 41  On October 17, 1937, when the Japanese occupied 

Guisui (present Baotou) city, they purposely left a high position, 

the director-in-chief of the Northwest Huijiao Society, vacant, so 

as to draw Ma Hongkui into that position. This society had four 

branches; they widely recruited the young Hui men, giving them 

military training and Japanese language education. 42  However, the 

“cozying-up” ploy to Ma Hongkui was in vain. In late 1938, the Jap -                               

> 39 Compiling Team of On the Issues of the Hui Hui Minzu ,ed., Hui Hui minzu
> wenti (On the Issues of the Hui Hui Minzu) , first published in 1941 in
> Yan ’an); re-published in Beijing: Minzu Press , 1980 , p. 84.
> 40 Yang Jingzhi, Riben zhi Huijiao zhengce (Japanese Policy on the Huijiao ),
> Chongqing: Commercial Press, 1943 . See Chapter 12 of Part One: “The
> Outline Drawn for the Establishment of a Hui Hui State ”(zuzhi Hui Hui
> guo zhi lunkuo), pp. 30-32.
> 41 The Japanese invited Ma Hongkui ’s brother, Ma Hongbing, and offered
> him a position in the puppet government. The Nationalist Government
> of Nanjing received the intelligence, and Chiang Kai-shek telegrammed to
> Ma Hongkui that “you had better ask your esteemed brother to be back
> to Ningxia from Beiping [present Beijing] ”. Ma Hongbing was soon called
> back to Ningxia from Beijing. See Yu Zhengui ,China’s Governments and
> Islam , Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 1996, p. 433.
> 42 “diren cedong Xibei Hui-bao zhi zhenxiang ”(The True Purpose of the
> Enemies to Instigate the Northwestern Hui Compatriots ) in Bulletin of
> China Huijiao National Salvation Federation , vol. 3, issue 7 (1941), p. 25.

The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 145 

anese found an ahong (imam) surnamed Zhang from the Northeast 

(Manchuria) and sent him to sell the idea of establishing the “Hui 

Hui State” to the Hui warlords in the Northwest provinces. How -

ever, Ma Honkui did not permit this ahong to enter the boundary 

of Ningxia. Before long, the Japanese dispatched eight planes to 

airdrop leaflets to Ningxia to demonstrate their threat and openly 

induce Ningxia to capitulate. 43  Later, Itagaki Seishiro, the chief-of-

military-staff of the Japanese Army in Northeastern China flew to 

Alashan in western Inner Mongolia, and invited Ma Hongkui for 

a negotiation, but the negotiation resulted in the crushing disap -

pointment of Itagaki Seishiro. 44  Itagaki Seishiro  then sent another 

forty airplanes to bombard Yinchuan three times: on November 

11, 1937, March 6, 1939, and September 15, 1939. 45  However, this 

showed the Japanese disillusionment of realizing the dream of a 

“Hui Hui State”. 46  Ma Hongkui became the chairman of Ningxia, 

and the Nationalist Government appointed Ma Hongbin, Ma Hon -

43  Yu Zhengui , Zhongguo lida zhengquan he Yisilan jiao  (China’s Govern-(China’s Govern-China’s Govern -

ments and Islam ),  Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 1996 , p. 433. 

44  Ma sent the Secretary of the Nationalist Party of Ningxia, Zhou Baihuang, to 

hold a  negotiation  on his  behalf . Itagaki Seishiro asked Zhou why the Ma ’s

clan, who had been acting as devoted officials of the imperial Qing, now 

was  not  willing  to help  to restore the Manchu government. Zhou  retort ed 

that during the time of the Allied Forces of Eight Powers, the Japanese sent 

the biggest troops to participate in the Allied Forces.  The Japanese Army 

at the Zhengyang Gate of Beijing killed many members of the Ma clan . By 

now,  he has not taken revenge for his family members, nor has he done 

anything  to revenge the shame of the country.  So the two sides are unable 

to co-exist. 

The background of such speech is, t o suppress the Chinese anti-imperi-o suppress the Chinese anti-imperi -

alist  Yi hetuan  Movement (the Boxer Uprising),  eight Western powers or-eight Western powers  or-or -

ganized  an  allied force to wage war on China.  Ma Fulu was Ma Fuxiang ’s

brother and Ma Hongkui ’s uncle, who was killed by the Allied forces at the 

Zhengyang Gate of Beijing when the Eight Allied Forces invaded Beijing in 

1900 . Over one hundred Hui soldiers died in the same battle. 

Citation from  Ma Shaoyun huiyi lu  (Memoir of Ma Shaoyun  [another 

name of Ma Hongkui]) cited by  Yu Zhengui , Zhongguo lida i zhengquan he 

Yisilan jiao  (China’s Governments and Islam ),  Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 

1996 , p. 434. 

45  See Ye Guangcai,  “Riben feiji san ci hongzha Yinchuan jianwen”  (What I 

Saw and Heard during the Three Bombardments of the Japanese Fight-aw and Heard  during the Three Bombardments of the Japanese Fight-during the  Three Bombardments of the Japanese Fight-Thr ee Bombardments of the Japanese Fight-ee  Bombardments of the Japanese Fight-Bombardment s of the Japanese Fight-s of the Japanese Fight-of the Japanese Fight -

ers against Yinchuan ) in Ningxia  Commission for  Historical  Data  under 

Ningxia  People’s Political Consultative Commission , ed,  Ningxia wenshi 

ziliao  (Ningxia Historical Data ) (Collection 23). Yinchuan: 1999, pp.  289-91 .

46  Yu Zhengui,  China’s Governments and Islam , Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 

1996 , p. 434. Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 146 

gkui’s brother, as the commander of western Suiyuan province in 

1938. In the summer of 1939, Itagaki Seishiro launched the first 

battle against Ma Hongbin, but was utterly defeated. The Battle of 

Wubulangkou in early 1940, however, was fierce and intense. In 

March of the same year, Ma Hongbin, together with another Na -

tionalist Army commanded by Fu Zuoyi, regained Wuyuan city. 

In the aftermath, Ma launched more than a dozen battles and at -

tacked the puppet Mongol troops in western Inner Mongolia, thus 

safely protecting Ningxia, Gansu and Shaanxi provinces from Jap -

anese aggression. The invincible Suiyuan and Ningxia became a 

permanent barrier to the realization of the “Hui Hui State” dream 

of the Japanese. 47  Although it failed, “the Japanese Army’s use of 

Islam in North Asia against Chinese nationalism ceased [only] with 

the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949.” 48 

III. China Hui Anti-Japanese Federation and 

the Goodwill Mission to the Middle East 

The national Hui alliance during the WWII, initially called  Zhong -

guo Huimin kangri jiuguo xiehui , or “China Huimin Anti-Japanese 

and National Salvation Association” was established in December 

of 1937 in Zhengzhou, Henan province by the Hui elites Shi Zizhou, 

Wang Jingzhai and others. At the time, Chinese President Chiang 

Kai-shek entrusted General Bai Chongxi, the top-ranking Hui of -

ficial in the National Government during WWII, to be in charge of 

the national Hui affairs. Then Bai suggested that this Association 

move to Wuhan in the spring of 1938. By May of the same year, its                            

> 47 “Sui-xi qianxian de Hui Hui jun ”(The Hui Hui Army in the frontier of West
> Suiyuan Province) in Bulletin of China Huijiao National Salvation Federa-China Huijiao National Salvation Federa-Huijiao National Salvation Federa -
> tion , vol. 1, issue 4 (November 15, 1939), p. 22.
> Also, Wang Wudian, “My Reminiscences of the West-Suiyuan Anti-
> Japanese War by the Nationalist 81st Corps ” in Ningxia Commission for
> Historical Data under Ningxia People’s Political Consultative Commis-Data under Ningxia People’s Political Consultative Commis-under Ningxia People’s Political Consultative Commis-People’s Political Consultative Commis -
> sion , ed., Ningxia wenshi ziliao (Ningxia Historical Data ) (Collection 14),
> Yinchuan: 1985, p. 63.
> The battle was so great that even the Straits Times in British Malaya
> reported the news. See “Chinese Gains in Suiyuan Claimed ”in Straits
> Times , March 27, 1940, p. 9.
> 48 Selçuk Esenbel, “Japan’s Global Claim to Asia and the World of Islam:
> Transnational Nationalism and World Power, 1900-1945” in The American
> Historical Review, Vol. 109, No. 4 (October 2000). Available from: <http://
> www.historycooperative.org/journals/ahr/109.4/esenbel.html> [viewed
> April 15, 2010.]

The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 147 

name was changed to  Zhongguo Huimin jiuguo xiehui  or “China 

Huimin National Salvation Federation,” and extended its internal 

executive body. Bai Chongxi’s contribution to the Hui participa -

tion in the Anti-Japanese War was unique. He called on the Hui to 

strengthen their natural relations with the world Muslims, 49  and he 

acted as the director of the Federation. 50  Sun Shengwu and Tang 

Kesan and other Hui elites, all together eleven in total, joined the 

Federation and became vice directors; so it became a semi-govern -

mental federation and relied on appropriation from the national 

government budget. It started publishing a bulletin, whose title 

was changed several times. It announced that all other Hui asso -

ciations or organizations should merge with it and become branch 

members and the order became authoritative. The Hui national 

organization began with this federation; the Hui had never before 

possessed a national institution that guided all the Hui across the 

entire country since their ancestors immigrated into China. In Oc -

tober 1939, the Federation was moved to Chongqing, the war-capi -

tal, and its title was changed to  Zhongguo Huijiao jiuguo xiehui , or 

“China Huijiao National Salvation Federation”. In 1946, it was re -

named  Zhongguo Huijiao xiehui  or “China’s Huijiao Association” 

and was moved to Nanjing. In 1949, it was moved, once more, to 

Taipei, Taiwan where it was located until the present. 51  When it 

49  Bai Chongxi , “fan qinlue yu Huijiao wenhua ” (The Anti-Invasion and 

Huijiao Culture) in  Bulletin of  China Huijiao National Salvation Federa-China  Huijiao National Salvation Federa-Huijiao National Salvation Federa -

tion , vol. 2, issue 1 (April 15, 1940), pp. 3-5. 

Also, Bai Chongxi,  “Zhongguo Huijiao yu shijie Huijiao ” (Huijiao in China 

and in the World)  (First published by the Central News Agency in 1942)  in 

Chang Chi-yun, ed. , bianjian lunwen ji  (Symposium on Borderland Affairs ,

vol. 2),  Taipei: The National Defense Research Institute, 1966, pp. 1034-37. 

50  See  “New Mohammedan Chief ” in  The North-China  Herald , January 22, 

1938, p. 482. 

Also,  “China  Huijiao National Salvation Federation  Moving to Chongqing 

and Setting up Branches ” in  Huimin  Yanlun  (Huimin’s  Voice Semimonthly ), 

vol. 1, issue 10 (Hankou: 1939).  Li Xinghua and Feng Jinyuan, ed , Selected 

Data  on  the Islamic History in China , 1911-1949 , Yinchuan: Ningxia ren -

min, 1985 , p. 1679. 

Also, Da Zhenyi & Liu Shuying,  “Evaluation on  ‘China Huijiao National 

Salvation Federation ’ during the Anti-Japanese War ” in  the Nationali-he Nationali -

ties Research Institute  of  Chin ese  Social Academy and the Nationalities 

Research Institute  of  Central Nationalities University, ed. , Huizu  shi lun 

ji  (Collected Articles of the Hu izu  History , 1949-1979 ), Yinchuan: Ningxia 

renmin, 1984 , pp. 134-35. 

51  Ma Tianying , “The Past and  Present of China Islamic Association” in Ma 

Tinying, ed,  Islamic Light , Kuala  Lumpur : Issue 39 (September 1972), p. 2 .Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 148 

was re-established in Wuhan in 1938, the declaration of the Fed -

eration says: 

“We decide to unite all the comrades from Huijiao circle to establish 

China Huimin National Salvation Federation with the aim of perpetu -

ating the spirit of our religion and showing our determination. We also 

warn the lunatic traitors to awaken quickly and join the front of resis -

tance so that we can keep the glory of our religion. The Japanese invad -

ers have occupied our inner land, and we have no choice but to fight 

back. We call on our compatriots to demonstrate our bravery inherited 

from our Sage Mohammed to endure the calamity, save our country 

and keep the peace of the world.” 52 

The Federation set up branches in all provinces, cities, coun -

ties and towns. The main contributions of the Federation were: to 

publicize the cruelties of the Japanese invasion and the news of 

the anti-Japanese battles in its bulletin; 53  to organize Hui youth 

corps, battlefield service teams, service teams for victims of air-

raids, women service work, and so on for the wounded soldiers 

and refugees; 54  to transport military supplies; 55  to establish lo -

cal Hui forces to fight against the Japanese; and so forth. Another 

notable contribution was that the Federation sponsorship of Hui 

international diplomacy with Islamic countries. Apart from these, 

the Federation made many efforts to promote Hui education, to 

52  “Declaration of China Huimin National Salvation Federation ” in  Xinhua 

Daily . Yan ’an: January 16, 1938. See D a Zhenyi, ed.,  Hubei Huizu guji zil -

iao jiyao  (Historical Data  on  the Hubei Huizu ), Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 

2007 , pp. 197-98. 

53  Eg,  “Huimin jiuguo xiehui fabiao gao xibei jiangling wen ” (A Public Letter 

from the Huimin National Salvation Federation to the Northwestern 

Military Generals),  Xinhua Daily , February  23, 1938. See D a Zhenyi, ed., 

Hubei Huizu guji ziliao jiyao  (Historical Data  on  the Hubei Huizu ). Yinch -

uan: Ningxia renmin, 2007 , pp. 218-19. 

54  Eg,  “Huimin zhandi fuwu tuan fu Yu xuanchuan kang ri ” (The Huimin 

Battlefield Service Team Going to Henan for Publicity of Resisting the 

Japanese) in  Xinhua Daily , June 24, 1938. See Da Zhenyi,  Historical Data 

on  the Hubei Huizu , p. 198. 

“Hui qing fuwu tuan gongzuo jin kuang ” (Recent  Works of the Huimin 

Youth Corps ) in  Bulletin of  China  Huijiao National Salvation Federation ,

vol. 1,  issue 1 0 ( June 19 40), pp. 36-37. 

55  Eg, in 1942, the Yunnan  Federation  Branch organized the Hui to transport 

military goods with more than 1,000  manful -carts, 10,000 horses in half-

year ’s time.  See  “Western Yunnan Hui ’s Participation in Transportation ”

in  Bulletin of  China  Huijiao National Salvation Federation , vo l. 5,  1, issue 

10  (March 1,  19 43 ), pp. 36-37. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 149 

secure Hui livelihood by creating every possible method of assis -

tance, and to protect Hui interests in army service, in administra -

tions at all levels, and in solving the problems regarding Hui-Han 

confrontations. 

The Federation organized two influential international anti-Jap -

anese publications, one in the Middle East and the other South -

east Asia. These activities were timely and provided counter-attack 

against the Japanese false propaganda and image. Selçuk Esenbel 

pointed out the real meaning of Japan’s “Asianist face” to the Mus -

lim world in the first half of the twentieth century: 

> “Most people at the turn of the twenty-first century have forgotten that
> there was a time in Japan before World War II when Japanese national -
> ists showed an Asianist face to the world’s Muslims, whom they wanted
> to befriend as allies in the construction of a new Asia under Japanese
> domination. The rise of Japan was a destabilizing factor that attract -
> ed Muslim activists who wanted to cooperate with the “Rising Star of
> the East” against the Western empires, accelerating contacts between
> Japan and the world of Islam from vast regions of Eurasia and North
> Africa.” 56

From the early 1900’s to the end of WWII, Japan tried to play the 

role of “Savior of Islam” against Western imperialism and colonial -

ism. Many Muslims of the world and their countries grasped the 

vision that “Muslim Japan” would be a means for their emanci -

pation from Western hegemony. The Japanese government sent 

the “Japanese Muslims” to perform pilgrimages to Mecca in 1934 

and in 1936. To initiate the strategy of Japan’s Islamic policy, Ja -

pan trained a younger generation of “Muslim” agents. Many of this 

younger generation of agents had served in the Pacific War, and 

others had received training in Okawa Shumei’s “spy school”. They 

wore Muslim attire and took appropriate Muslim names. All de -

clared their entry into the faith in order to serve their country. Oka -

wa Shumei was the ultranationalistic Japanese political theorist         

> 56 Selçuk Esenbel, “Japan’s Global Claim to Asia and the World of Islam:
> Transnational Nationalism and World Power, 1900–1945” in The American
> Historical Review , vol. 109, no. 4, October 2004. Available from:
> <http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/ahr/109.4/esenbel.htm l>
> [viewed Nov. 3, 2006.]
> Also, Muhammed Abdur Rhman Siddiqi, Islam Shines in Japan: Perspectives
> and Prospects , Kuala Lumpur: A.S. Noordeen, 2008 , p. 23, which the author
> states that “During the year[s] 1900-1945, the Muslims and many Japanese
> were motivated to consider Japan as Savior of Islam against the West ”.Wan LEI

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 150 

whose writings inspired many of the right-wing extremist groups 

that dominated Japanese politics during the 1930s. Okawa Shumei 

later played a prominent part in Japanese Islamic Studies in using 

Islam as a means for Japan’s expansion. After World War II, he was 

prosecuted as a class-A war criminal by the Allies. 57  In China, for 

example, the  Huijiao Weekly Bulletin  under the control of the pup -

pet “China Islamic Association” at Beiping was incessantly pub -

lished from 1940 to 1945 to sell such thoughts. 58 

Therefore, when the European and American countries saw 

very clearly the false propaganda of the Japanese and would not 

be cheated by the Japanese, the countries in the Middle Eat could 

hardly get rid of the false propaganda because there were fewer 

communications between these countries and China at the time, 

and they were ignorant of the true happenings of the Japanese ag -

gression. China has a big Hui population who share the faith of Is -

lam with the peoples of the Middle East. It would be simple for the 

Hui people to explain the truth to these countries; so such people-

to-people diplomacy was a pioneering work and should be com -

pleted by the Hui people. 59 

Ma Tianying was the initiator and a participant of the govern -

ment-sponsored “The Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the 

Middle East” in 1937. He recalled the initiation of the visit:         

> “I met Sun Yan Yi [another name Sun Shengwu] on a day in June 1937 in -
> side a church along the Zhejiang Road in Shanghai, and suggested to him
> that persons like us would become cannon fodder if we go to a battle…
> .I would like to lead a publicity team to the Muslim world and reveal the
> Japanese brutalities thus to seek their support. The first important issue
> was to push Muslim people to demand that their governments discontinue
> diplomatic relationships with Japan; the second was to expose the atroci -
> ties of the Japanese to gain international sympathy for China; the third was
> to boycott Japanese goods; and the fourth, to ask them to help the Chinese
> refugees.” 60
> 57 Ibid.
> 58 This bulletin published altogether 194 issues.
> 59 Tang Kesan, “Preface to Diaries of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission
> to the Middle East ”, Wang Zengshan, ed., Diaries of the Chinese Muslim
> Goodwill Mission to the Middle East , Chongqing: 1943; Reprinted at Kuala
> Lumpur: 1997, p. vii.
> 60 Ma Tianying, “Sun Yanyi shi he wo” (Sun Yanyi and I) in Islamic Light ,
> Kuala Lumpur, no. 74 (August 31 1975), p. 2. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 151 

In fact, the very da y when the China Huimin National Salva -

tion Federation was established, “the Association [Federation] 

has decided to send delegates to India, Egypt, Turkey, and other 

Mohammedan countries to explain the stand of the Chinese 

Mohammedans.” 61  At the time, another eminent Hui man, Tang 

Kesan, was a high-positioned official in the Mongol-Tibetan Af -

fairs Commission, the  de facto  minority affairs department of the 

National Government. Wang Zengshan was a parliamentary mem -

ber of the Legislative Yuan, and Sun Yanyi was the director of the 

Treasury Ministry; they were members of Hui elites, having good 

reputations among the Hui people. These three persons first dis -

cussed the matter, and then reported to General Bai Chongxi, who 

quickly approved the report. 62  “Mr. Sun Yan Yi was a strong sup -

porter …Mr. Sun deserved full credit for the success of these two 

Good Missions.” 63 

The Goodwill Mission to the Middle East was organized in No -

vember 1938 in the capital of Nanjing. Wang Zengshan, who grad -

uated from Istanbul University, acted as the head, accompanied by 

Ma Tianying, who was good in English and French, Zhang Zhaoli, 

who was good in English, Xue Wenbo, who was good in classical 

Chinese, and Wang Shiming, who graduated from Al-Azhar Uni -

versity. The jammed transportation caused by the move of the 

Chinese government from Nanjing to Chongqing made it difficult 

for the members of the delegation to gather, so they started their 

journey in November 1938. On January 11, 1938, the delegation 

left Hong Kong for Mecca. (See “Timetable of the Goodwill Mis -

sion to the Middle East”). Considering the time limitation, the 

delegation first went Mecca for the annual Hajj. In February, they 

went on pilgrimage and stayed i n Saudi Arabia for over a month 

before arriving in Cairo. They planned to go to Turkey after Egypt,                

> 61 See “New Mohammedan Chief ”in The North-China Herald , January 22,
> 1938, p. 482.
> 62 Bai Chongxi said, “I have talked with Mr. Tang Kesan about our wide
> publicity among the international Muslims …That is why we organized The
> Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Middle East. ”See Bai Chongxi,
> “zunshou Mu xun fankang qinlue ”(Following Mohammed ’s Teaching and
> Resisting against Invasion) in Huijiao dazhong (Huijiao Masses ), issue 1
> (Wuchang : 1938) , p. 3.
> 63 Ma Tianying. “Sun Yanyi and I” in Islamic Light ,Kuala Lumpur: No. 74
> (August 31 1975), p. 2.
> Another Mission was the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission to the South
> Eastern Asia.

Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 152 

but unfortunately, they were refused for visas because of Japanese-

created rumors that swayed the Turkish government’s acceptance 

of the delegation. They had to change their schedule and paid vis -

its to Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Iran, and then India. Then news came 

from the Huijiao National Salvation Federation at home that they 

should be ready to visit Turkey since the government had solved 

the diplomatic problem with Turkey. The team left India for Tur -

key on October 18 and finished their task on January 25, 1939; then 

the team returned to Chongqing. 64 

IV. Visit to Turkey: a Sample Study 

of the Goodwill Mission’s Activities 65 

Turkey had been attracting the attention of the Hui people in 

China because of the great changes that had taken place in this tra -

ditional Muslim country in the early 20th century, and the achieve -

64  See  Wang Zengshan , ed,  Diaries of the Chin ese Muslim Goodwill Mission to 

the Middle East . This is a general summery of the journeys of the delegation 

by the writer. 

Also, Jue Yuan,  “News Report: The Turkish People Deeply Believe Our Anti-

Japanese War Will Win the Victory ” in  Yue Hwa , vol.  11 , combined issues 

4-6  (Guilin : 193 9), pp.  10-12 .

Also, see the successive news reports in the  Weekly Bulletin of China Hui -

min Salvation Federation  (Chongqing: 1938-1939). 

65  “Th e Visit to Turkey ” is  mainly  based upon Wang Zengshan , Diaries of 

the Chinese  Islamic  Goodwill Mission to the Middle Eas t (First published 

in 1943) , Publisher:  Dr.  Wang Erli of the Muslim Welfare Organization of 

Malaysia , Kuala Lumpur: 1996 , pp. 378-403. 

Also,  Jue Yuan  (another name Zhang Zhaoli),  “News Report: The Turkish 

People Deeply B elieve Our Anti-Japanese War Will Win the Victory” in  Yue 

Hwa , vol. 11, combined issues 4-6 (Guilin: 1939), pp. 10-12. 

Also, see the successive news reports in  Weekly  Bulletin of China Huimin 

National Salvation Federation  (Hankou: 1938; Chongqing: 1939). The news 

reports are: 

“Jindong Fangwentuan haiwai xuanchuan gongzuo” (The Goodwill Missi -

on to the Middle East Going Abroad for Publicity) in no. 14 (Nov. 18, 1938), 

p. 54; 

“Jing gao Jindong Yisilan jaiobao shu” (Announcement to the Middle East 

Muslims) in no. 15 (Nov. 25, 1938), p. 59; 

“Jindong Fangwentuan zai Tu xuanchuan” (The Goodwill Mission to the 

Middle East Giving Publicity in Turkey) in no. 17 (Dec. 9, 1938), p. 56; 

“Jindong Fangwentuan tongxun” (Newsreport on the Goodwill Mission to 

the Middle East) in issue no. 18 (Dec. 16, 1938), pp. 70-71; and 

“Jindong Fangwent uan huiguo ” (Return  of the Goodwill Mission to the 

Middle East) in no. 25 (Feb. 3, 1939), p. 99. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 153 

ments the Turkish people attained. Similarly, early 20th century 

China was also under many revolutions. The people in China, in -

cluding the minority Hui, were witnessing the transition of their 

country from feudalistic monarchy into a Republic in modern 

sense. Wang Kuan, the founder of the modern Hui educational sys -

tem who had successfully changed the Hui old mosque education, 

said, “It was not until I returned to China from Turkey that I knew 

the general course of the world’s development is to popularize 

education first of all, without which a nation could not survive.” 66 

Another member of the Hui elite, Ma Hongkui, who was the chair -

man of the Hui-clustered Ningxia province, said, “We had better 

learn from Turkey. Before the war it was called the Sick Man of the 

Middle East, and was oppressed by imperialists, which was like 

China in many ways ...... because they were only confined to the 

meaningless religious restrictions and could not raise the true reli -

gious spirit.....until General Kemal determined to reform all the old 

institutions that did not suit the new era. This is the true spirit of 

Islam.” 67  Many Hui periodicals published articles during China’s 

Anti-Japanese War, setting Turkey as a model to encourage the 

Chinese people to fight against her aggressors. 68 

The delegation of the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission to the 

Middle East left India on October 11 and arrived at Port Said, 

Egypt on October 19, then further continuing northward for Istan -

bul, former capital of Turkey, on October 24. The very entrance of 

the delegation to Turkey witnessed the friendship of the Turkish 

people towards the Chinese Hui Muslims. Three policemen knew 

the identities of the delegation members and immediately asked                            

> 66 Wang Kuan, “The Announcement of ‘China Islamic Mutual Progress Asso-Wang Kuan, “The Announcement of ‘China Islamic Mutual Progress Asso-“The Announcement of ‘China Islamic Mutual Progress Asso-The Announcement of ‘China Islamic Mutual Progress Asso-‘China Islamic Mutual Progress Asso -
> ciation’” on March 1, 1912 in Beijing , appended by Bai Shouyi. Zhongguo
> Hui Hui Minzu shi (The History of China’s Hui Hui Minzu), Beijing: zhon-(The History of China’s Hui Hui Minzu), Beijing: zhon-The History of China’s Hui Hui Minzu ), Beijing: zhon-), Beijing: zhon-, Beijing: zhon -
> ghua shuju, 2003 ,pp. 734-35.
> 67 Ma Hongkui, “Yao yong xin jiao jingshen wanjiu Zhongguo minzu de
> lunwang ”(Save the Chinese Nation from Perishing with Religious Spirit),
> in Huijiao Dazhong (The Hui Mass ), issue 1 (Wuchang: Feb. 25, 1938), pp.
> 8-16.
> 68 Cf. “Tuerqi fuxing ke wei wo guo bangyang ”(The Turkish Revivalism May
> Become the Example for Our Country ”in Weekly Bulletin of China Huimin
> National Salvation Federation , no. 2 (Hankou: Jan. 20, 1938), pp. 6-7.
> Also, see Sha Jinming, “Tuerqi diyu wai wu zhi shili jiqi jiaoxun ”(The
> Practical Exemplifications and Lessons of Turkey in Resisting against
> Foreign Aggressors) in Bianjiang Banyukan (Frontier Bi-Monthly), vol. 3,
> combined issues 7-9 (Nanjing: Feb. 25, 1938), pp. 1-4.

Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 154 

many questions about China’s anti-Japanese War. After checking 

their visas, a man who seemed to be an official gave them an au -

thorized paper and told them to keep it well, saying, “You please 

don’t lose it. We are brothers; but I am sorry that I am limited in 

my position and cannot give you more assistance.” Then three po -

licemen accompanied them all the way to the centre of Istanbul, 

and then talked with them until very late in the night. 69  Hearing 

of the delegation arriving at Istanbul, the charge d’affaires ad in -

terim, Tong Deqian, and a dozen local reporters came to welcome 

them. Istanbul is located in the pivot of the Euro-Asian continents 

and the Dardanelles is well known all over the world with its vari -

ous architectural types. The delegation head, Mr. Wang Zengshan, 

had graduated from Istanbul University in 1927, and naturally had 

many old friends in Turkey, who flooded to his place upon the 

news that he had come to the city again; they held a tea party to 

welcome Wang on October 26. Delegation members Ma Tianying, 

Xue Wenbo, Zhang Zhaoli, and 

> ***

Time table of the Goodwill Mission to the Middle East                                                  

> Time from Time to Country City from City to
> (or for stay) Days
> Nov.16, 1937 Jan 10, 1938 China Nanjing ,Hong Kong 56
> Jan 11, 1938 Feb. 3, 1938 Hong Kong Suez Canal 23
> Feb. 3 Feb. 5 Suez Jeddah 2
> Feb. 5 March 2 Arabia Mecca, Jeddah ,
> Arafat, Mina 26
> March 3 March 9 Jeddah Suez 7
> March 10 May 14 Egypt
> Cairo, Suez,
> Alexandra (10
> days), Port Said
> 66
> May 15 May 17 Port Said Beirut 2
> May 17 May 23 Lebanon Beirut 7
> May 24 Beirut Damascus 1
> May 25 May 30 Syria Damascus 6
> May 31 June 1 Damascus Bagdad 2

69  Wang Zengshan , Diaries of the Chinese  Islamic  Goodwill Mission to the 

Middle Eas t, under the sub-title of  “Three Policemen  Sympathetic  towards 

Us ” at p. 379. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 155 

Time from  Time to  Country  City from  City to 

(or for stay)  Days 

June 2  June 8  Iraq  Bagdad  7

June 9  June 10  Bagdad  Tehran  2

June 11  June 25  Iran  Tehran, Isfahan, 

Bushehr  15 

June 26  July 1  Bushehr  Bombay  6

July 2  Oct. 10  India 

Bombay, 

Lahore, 

Lucknow, 

Patna, Calcutta 

101 

Oct. 11  Oct. 24  Bombay  Istanbul  14 

Oct. 25  Nov. 17  Turkey  Ankara, Istanbul  24 

Nov. 18  Nov. 23  Istanbul  Alexandra  5

Nov. 24  Dec. 4  Egypt  Alexandra, Port 

Said  12 

Dec. 5  Dec. 17  Port Said  Colombo  12 

Dec. 17  Dec. 18  Ceylon 

(Sri Lanka)  Colombo  1

Dec. 18  Dec. 26 

(morning)  Colombo  Singapore  8

Dec. 26  (day time)  Malaya  Singapore  1

Dec. 26 

(night)  Dec. 28  Singapore  Sai Kung  2

Dec. 29  Jan. 2, 1939  Annan 

(Vietnam)  Sai Kung  5

Jan. 3, 1939  Jan. 10, 1939  Sai Kung  Hanoi  8

Total: 8 countries visited; 26 cities with publicity activities; 55,155 kilome -

ters in distance; and 436 days 

Source: Wang Zengshan, ed,  Diaries of the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mis -

sion to the Middle East  (First published in 1943). Publisher: Wang Erli of the 

Muslim Welfare Organization of Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur: 1996, pp. 444-447. 

*** 

Wang Shiming was invited to join the party, too. In the party, the 

guests and hosts honestly talked about many topics such as the 

Anti-Japanese War, the sacrifice of the Hui people for their coun -

try, the relationships between China and Turkey, and so on. Tur -Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 156 

key had been invaded by Greece fifteen years before, and lost two 

thirds of its territories at the time. However, the Turkish people 

and the Turkish army, under the leadership of President Mustafa 

Kemal Atatürk, made great sacrifices and finally won their inde -

pendence and freedom. Fifteen years after the foundation of the 

Republic of Turkey, the Turkish people threw themselves into the 

construction of the new country, which grew stronger and stron -

ger; now it had become a big power in the Middle East. The Turkish 

people regarded the invasion of the Japanese into China as similar 

to that of Turkey by Greece fifteen years earlier. The Chinese peo -

ple had an unyielding character, they were fighting against their 

enemies firmly; their spirit was like that of the Turkish people fif -

teen years ago. 

October 29, 1938 was the fifteenth National Day of Turkey since 

its foundation and the Turkish government decided to hold a mili -

tary parade in the capital of Ankara. The delegation was planning 

to go to the capital and watch the parade. They left for the capital 

at the night of October 26. On the morning of October 28, accom -

panied by the charge d’affaires ad interim, Tong Deqian, the del -

egation paid a visit to Turkish Foreign Affairs Minister  Tevfik Rüştü 

Aras . Mr. Wang Zenshan stated the intention of the Goodwill Mis -

sion and the experiences of the delegation in the Middle East coun -

tries. Wang Zengshan, on behalf of the delegation and all the Hui 

people in China, also expressed the best wishes to the Turkish Pres -

ident, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, who was recuperating his health in 

Istanbul. Then, Mr. Ma Tianying talked to the minister in French on 

the relationship between China and Turkey, on the Sino-Japanese 

War, and on the various conditions of the countries in the Middle 

East. Minister  Tevfik Rüştü Aras  said that the relationship between 

the two countries, apart from common international friendship, 

was special since they have same blood origin. The Turkish people 

came from the Turkic race in Northwest China, so their language, 

religion and customs are close to those of the Muslims in North -

west China. The skin and hair of the Turkish people are also close 

to those of the Chinese people. Regarding the Sino-Japanese War, 

Minister  Tevfik Rüştü Aras  deeply believed that upon hard struggles 

by the Chinese people, they would regain their lost land, and would 

win victory over the enemy, just as the Turkish people had over the 

Greeks fifteen years before. Furthermore, the Japanese were relying 

on Western skills and throwing away their traditional oriental mo -

rality and civilization, thus and killing their own race. Such deeds The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 157 

made themselves not only the enemies of the Chinese, but also the 

enemies of all Asian peoples. After the talk, the minister invited the 

delegation to watch the military review; this was to show his enthu -

siasm to the delegation. At two o’clock in the afternoon of 29th, the 

Turkish government started the military review. The people for the 

ceremony were swarming and the display magnificent; the only re -

gret, as felt by the Turkish people, was the absence of the president. 

The Prime Minister, Celal Bayar, on behalf of the president, held 

the ceremony. He reviewed the Navy that displayed more than 250 

airplanes, the boy scouts, the infantry, the cavalry, and the artillery 

-altogether 30,000 people; they were well armed and were in high 

spirits. The delegation appreciated that Turkey gained such strong 

strength within a short time. 

On the afternoon of October 31, the Turkish government held a 

welcoming party to entertain leaders from foreign countries. All 

the foreign leaders participated in the party. The representatives of 

China, the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Japan and Italy shared one 

table. The Russian representatives sat in the middle, with the Chi -

nese representative on his left and the Italian ambassador on his 

right. Further left sat the Japanese ambassador, and the Afghani -

stan ambassador sat on the left-most seat. The Japanese ambas -

sador suddenly spoke to the Italian ambassador, “Have you, lord, 

heard that a Chinese delegation is doing some activities in Anka -

ra?” The Italian ambassador replied, “Yes, I have. I saw five people 

of this delegation watching the military review in the National Day 

celebration. I heard that they are the Hui representatives coming 

to visit Turkey. Do you, lord, refer to them?” The Japanese ambas -

sador said again, “Yes, I refer to this delegation. This is a delega -

tion dispatched by China to visit all the Middle East countries for 

anti-Japanese publicity and to break the united front of the Fascist 

countries. They are not a delegation of the common Hui people.” 

The speaker had raised his voice when he said so, so was heard by 

the Russian representative. The Russian representative expressed 

his advice that such a conversation be stopped, and then the Japa -

nese ambassador dropped into silence. This conversation, howev -

er, was later spread out as an anecdote, which for a while amused 

the Turkish people who embraced democratic politics. 

The delegation stayed in Ankara for two weeks, during which 

time they visited every newspaper house, many social organiza -

tions, schools, and some private tea parties. They grasped every op -

portunity to make anti-Japanese publicity. The newspapers com -Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 158 

petitively reported anti-Japanese news every day and published 

anti-Japanese editorials. Once, when they were making publicity, a 

poor Turkish man, whose name was remembered as Muhammed 

and who was very sympathetic towards China’s resistance, swore 

piously that he would kill a chicken as a sacrifice the very day China 

won its victory. 70 

The illness of President Mustafa Kemal Atatürk became worse in 

those days, and he finally passed away at 09:10 in the morning of 

November 10. All the army men and people of Turkey were stricken 

by this tragic news, and all the country became heartbroken. As the 

remains of the president would be placed in Istanbul so the peo -

ple could go and offer their condolences, the Chinese delegation 

also left Ankara for Istanbul on November 11. On November 13, 

they paid a visit to the Mayor of Istanbul, Muhittin Üstündağ, and 

they were warmly received. The mayor invited the delegate to par -

ticipate in the public memorial ceremony for the late president at 

nine o’clock in the morning of November 15. 71  After the visit to the 

Mayor, the delegation paid a visit to the Republican People’s Party 

Istanbul Branch and gave them the “Announcement to the World 

Muslims”, which the party appreciated very much, and allowed the 

delegation to distribute the announcement anywhere inside Tur -

key, so to reveal the truth of the Japanese invasion against China, 

and arouse the sympathy of Turkish people towards China. On the 

morning of the 16th, the delegation bought a wreath, and went to 

the late president’s tomb for the memorial ceremony. 72  Two of -

ficials dispatched by the Mayor accompanied them; the delega -

tion learnt of the president’s enormous contributions and felt his 

great personality. The following day, all the newspapers published 

photos of the Chinese delegation visiting to the Turkish late presi -                               

> 70 Weekly Bulletin of China Huimin National Salvation Federation , no. 18
> (Chongqing: Dec. 16, 1938), p. 71; this is a repeated report of the Central
> News Agency on Dec. 13, 1938 (cf. the original remark).
> 71 There is a discrepancy in dating their memorial activity between two
> sources :Wang Zengshan ,ed. ,Diaries of the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mis-Islamic Goodwill Mis-Goodwill Mis -
> sion to the Middle Eas t(First published in 1943) says it was “morning of
> November 15th ” (See the version published by Dr. Wang Erli of the Mus-”(See the version published by Dr. Wang Erli of the Mus-(See the version p ublished by Dr. Wang Erli of the Mus-ublish ed by Dr. Wang Erli of the Mus-ed by Dr. Wang Erli of the Mus-Wang Erli of the Mus -
> lim Welfare Organization of Malaysia ,Kuala Lumpur: 1996 , p. 402; while
> Jue Yuan ’s“Tuerqi ren shen xin wo guo kangzhan bi huo zuihou shengli ”
> (News Report: The Turkish People Deeply Believe Our Anti-Japanese War
> Will Win the Victory) says it was “November 16th ”[See Yue Hwa , vol. 11 ,
> combined issues 4-6 (Guilin : 193 9), pp. 10-12] .
> 72 Cf. the above note about the exact time. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 159 

dent, and the Turkish people were moved that the Chinese Islamic 

delegation, who were thousands of miles from home, had come to 

morn for the president; this was a very special case among all the 

delegates from all foreign countries, and consequently gained its 

influence. 

Some newspapers were noteworthy in mentioning their backup 

to the Chinese anti-Japanese war and they offered sympathetic 

sentiment towards China’s resistance. “ Ulus  (meaning “Nation” 

and published at Ankara) and  Tan  (meaning “Dawn” and pub -

lished at Istanbul) have their high moral integrity. The Japanese 

tried to buy them over with bribery, they were not, however, in -

fluenced at all. 73  To publicize China,  Ulus  also published the Pro -

gramme of the Nationalist Party of China and the Three Principles 

of the People by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. 74  The  Tan  started reporting on 

the Chinese delegation even before the delegation arrived Turkey 

(on October 9th). 75  On November 11, Mr. Zekeriya Bey, director 

of the  Tan , particularly discussed with the delegation for prepa -

ration of publishing a feature on China in the newspaper  Tan .

The feature covered thee topics on the founder of the Republic of 

China, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, China’s latest revolution against warlords, 

the Japanese aggression against China, Islam in China, and so on. 

Cumhuriyet  (meaning “Republic”) was obviously instigated by the 

Japanese, and published something unfavorable to the Chinese 

delegation before the delegation came to Turkey. They changed 

their attitude, however, and the director Mr. Yunus Nadi visited the 

delegation to inquire about the war against the Japanese. 76 

The Turkish parliament, in accord with the constitution, elected 

the former prime minister who was the former Army General,  Mus -

tafa İsmet İnönü , as the new president. He was witty and brave. The 

delegation head, Wang Zenshan, had known him ten years before.                         

> 73 “Repot on the Islamic Goodwill Mission to the Middle East ”in Bulletin of
> China Huimin National Salvation Federation , no. 18 (Chongqing: Dec. 16,
> 1938), p. 71; this is a repeated report of the Central News Agency on Dec.
> 13, 1938 (cf. the original remark).
> 74 Wang Zengshan ,ed. ,Diaries of the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission to the
> Middle Eas tunder the sub-title of “Programmes of the Nationalist Party and
> Three Principles of the People Published in Foreign Newspapers ”, p. 479.
> 75 See Wang Zengshan ,ed. ,Diaries of the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission
> to the Middle Eas tunder the sub-title of “The Newspaper Tan Sympathizes
> with Our Country ”at p. 395.
> 76 Ibid. Wan LEI

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 160 

The delegation  telegrammed to the new president congratulating 

him on inauguration on November 16, and expressing its grati -

tude to all those who had warmly entertained the delegation. The 

mission of visiting Turkey would be completed and the delegation 

would be bound for Egypt on November 18, and then they would re -

turn to China. The delegation had printed several thousand copies 

of the “Announcement to the World Muslims” in Ankara, now they 

distributed these to the government and the people, and to schools 

and religious societies, in order to arouse the sympathy of the Turk -

ish people to morally condemn the Japanese and impose economic 

sanctions against the Japanese. The very day of November 18 when 

the delegation left, they gave a public speech in the Sultan Ahmed 

Mosque, with more than one thousand people gathered. 77 

V. The Delegation’s Struggle against Troubles by the Japanese 78 

The Japanese kept giving troubles to the delegation. When the 

delegation went by ship to Saudi Arabia via the Red Sea, three Japa -

nese ronins, one of whom was called Suzuki, the second called Ko -

bayashi Tetsuo, and the third was not given the name and was from 

Manchukuo (Manchu State, i.e., Northeast China where was oc -

cupied by the Japanese Army). Suzuki had lived in British Malaya, 

and this was the fourth time for him to “go to Hajj”. But as the dele -

gation later knew, they went to Mecca only for making propaganda 

that China would unite Soviet Union and embrace communism, 

that China was ready to give up any religion; and that Xinjiang in 

the Northwest should get independence; and so on. They claimed 

that Xinjiang province had already became a  de facto  independent 

country, with a Muslim acting as the “president”. 79  The delega -

tion made great efforts to publicize the real China and to expose                     

> 77 See Wang Zengshan, “The General Report of the Chin ese Muslim Goodwill
> Mission to the Middle East” appended by the book of Diaries of the Chin ese
> Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Middle East , with the sub-title “Mosques
> and Public Speeches ”at p. 473.
> 78 This part is mainly from Wang Zengshan, “The General Report of the
> Chin ese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” with the subtitle
> “Trouble the Japanese Made to the Delegation and Their Activities in the
> Middle East ”, pp. 490-493.
> 79 This might refer to the Uyghur nationalists who established the “Repub-This might refer to the Uyghur nationalists who established the “Repub-“Repub -
> lic of Eastern Turk estan” on November 12, 1933, which lasted for three
> months. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 161 

the fraud of the Japanese when they arrived at Mecca. There were 

120,000  Muslims going to Hajj that year, and the annual meeting of 

the International Islamic Conference was held there. After hajj, the 

Saudi Arabian King, Ibn Saud, met the delegation on February 11, 

1938, at Mina. The Egyptian finance minister, Abdullah Suleiman, 

met the delegation on February 27, and showed considerable sym -

pathy towards the Chinese people. He also invited the delegation 

to watch the military review. The publicity in Saudi Arabia was a 

big success indeed. When the delegation was bound for Egypt in 

early March of the same year, they met the three Japanese ronins 

again. This time, the ronins seemed very depressed; when seeing 

the delegation members, they escaped and hid themselves. 

The Japanese spies made troubles to the delegation when it vis -

ited Egypt, Iraq and India, too. In Egypt, they shadowed the delega -

tion closely. When the delegation gave speeches, they asked many 

questions rudely; besides, they created rumors that the Chinese 

Army was defeated and the Chinese government was negotiating 

with the Japanese. The delegation, however, just used the victory 

of the Battle Tai’erzhaung 80  to slam such rumors. With the efforts 

of the delegation, more newspapers reported the news of the vic -

tory. In early June 1938 when the delegation was staying in a hotel 

in Iran, four Japanese men, claiming to be businessmen, stayed in 

the same hotel where the delegation resided. When the delegation 

reported to the police and the policemen came to check, they dis -

appeared immediately. 

On July 15, 1938, when the delegation was going to give public 

speeches to the Muslim Students Union in Lahore of Punjab, India, 

two Japanese men were discovered among the audience. The man 

in charge of the speech asked the delegation if they should drive the 

Japanese out of the audience. The delegation replied that the Chi -

nese people were fighting against the Japanese warlords instead of 

the Japanese people, so what was the harm that they stayed here 

and listened to their speeches? By the end of the public speeches, 

when all the audience was moved by the speeches that revealed 

the brutality of the Japanese invaders, they shouted loudly for the      

> 80 This was one of the biggest battles during the Anti-Japanese War, which
> was launched in March 1938 on the eastern bank of the Grand Canal of
> China. The Nationalist Army fighting against the Japanese Army was under
> the command of General Li Zongren and his Hui colleague, General Bai
> Chongxi. The Battle broke the myth of the Japanese military invincibility .Wan LEI

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 162 

boycott of Japanese goods, and then the two Japanese men fled 

helter-skelter. 

Japanese officials were involved in interfering with the publici -

ties of the delegation. In late May 1938, when the delegation paid 

its visit to Damascus, Syria, one vice ambassador from the Japa -

nese Embassy in Beirut, whose name was not mentioned in the 

resources, specifically came to this city and visited Fahir Bey Ba -

roudi, an Islamic organization that entertained and financially 

supported the delegation. He said that the five Hui men from China 

were communists; and they were cheating the world by claiming 

that the Japanese army killed the Hui people and destroyed their 

mosques in China. However, they retorted to him that the five Hui 

men were good Muslims, and that, “was it not true that the Japa -

nese killed the Hui people and destroyed their mosques in China?” 

The vice ambassador did not drop his idea to smear the delegation. 

He wrote a letter to the Syrian General Commercial Society, say -

ing that the five Hui men were publicizing a boycott of Japanese 

products for the real intention of promoting British goods, and 

they should not be cheated by these five Hui men from China. The 

director of the Society, however, told every detail about the letter to 

the delegation afterwards. 

The Japanese ambassador to India, Kiyoshi Fukui, denied the ac -

cusations of the delegation that the Japanese Army killed the Mus -

lim Hui and destroyed their mosques, and this was published in 

the newspaper,  Bombay News . The delegation gave many practical 

examples, and dared the ambassador to provide disproof. Kiyoshi 

Fukui then lapsed into silence. This matter drew the attention of 

the Indian society at the time. 

VI. Contributions of the Hui Publicities Abroad 

The Goodwill Mission to the Middle East made great contribu -

tions to the Anti-Japanese War. Firstly, during this time, Japan pur -

posely built a mosque in Tokyo to lure Middle East Muslims. The 

Japanese government invited officials from these countries to par -

ticipate in the opening ceremony of the new mosque on May 12, 

1938, the sole purpose was to camouflage its real intention. The Hui 

delegates were in Egypt at the time, and they immediately wrote 

in Arabic an “Announcement to All Muslims in the World by the 

Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” and posted 

it to all Muslim countries and many people’s societies and organi -The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 163 

zations, telling the public that there was no Muslim ethnic group 

in Japan; even years prior to the construction of the first mosque 

in Kobe, which was sponsored by Indian Muslims, the Japanese 

government refused to protect it legally; when Muslims gathered 

for prayers, the Japanese blocked and obstructed them. While the 

Japanese government was building the Tokyo Mosque, their sol -

diers were destroying tens of hundreds of mosques in China and 

were slaughtering hundreds of thousands of Muslims in China. As 

a result, the Egyptian government immediately refused to join the 

ceremony of the Tokyo Mosque. 81  They also wrote an announce -

ment and posted it to many Hui societies inside China. 82 

A second aspect is that they visited many Islamic country leaders 

when they went to Hajj at Mecca, and they simultaneously attended 

the annual International Islamic Conference. There, they met many 

leaders from the Islamic countries, and grasping this opportunity, 

revealed the brutality of the Japanese Army against the Chinese 

people. When they visited the Middle East countries on their time 

schedule, they paid their visits to many top leaders of these coun -

tries. The Saudi Arabian King Ibn Saud, the Egyptian King Farouk I, 

the Syrian President Hashim al-Atassi, and the Iraqi King Ghazi bin 

Faisal, all met the Middle East delegation. They also paid visits to 

many prime ministers, ministers, members of parliaments, coun -

cilors, and mayors, university presidents, and leaders of public so -

cieties and organizations; only those names motioned in the report 

include more than sixty. 83  They articulated in detail the real inten -

tion of the delegation and reported the real happenings in China. 

A third aspect is that they visited many people’s societies and 

organizations. The “General Report” by delegation head, Wang                             

> 81 “The General Report of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-“The General Report of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-The General Report of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-the Chin ese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-ese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-the Mid -
> dle East” , pp. 480-482.
> Also, “Ge guo jujue canjia Dongjing libaisi luocheng dianli ”(Many
> Countries Refusing Attending the Opening Ceremony of Tokyo Mosque)
> in Yue Hwa , vol. 10, issue 5 (Guilin: May 15, 1938), p. 16.
> Only one distinguished name from the Middle Eastern countries, Prince
> Wahaba of Saudi Arabia, was mentioned for attending the opening
> ceremony of Tokyo Mosque in 1938. See Muhammed Abdur Rhman
> Siddiqi, Islam Shines in Japan: Perspectives and Prospects ,Kuala Lumpur:
> A. S. Noordeen, 2008 , p. 6.
> 82 “The General Report of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-“The General Report of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-The General Report of the Chinese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-the Chin ese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-ese Muslim Goodwill Mission to the Mid-the Mid -
> dle East” , pp. 483-484.
> 83 Ibid, under the sub-title of “The Elites that the Delegation Paid Visits ”at
> pp. 468-69. Wan LEI

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 164 

Zenshan, mentioned a dozen well-known societies and organiza -

tions that they visited. These were mainly in Egypt, Syria, Iran and 

India. Normally, after a public speech given by the delegation to 

a society, the audience would voluntarily go on to persuade busi -

nessmen to give up selling Japanese goods. 84  They also visited 

eighteen universities and schools. 85  They made twenty-one pub -

lic speeches to these societies and organizations, universities and 

schools; besides, they also gave sixteen mosque speeches. 86  Nine -

teen welcoming meetings and twenty-three tea parties were held 

by various personalities and societies; as a rule, the delegation also 

gave speeches. 87  Apart from these speeches, they gave many news 

briefings to the newspapers and news agencies. And they distribut -

ed many brochures and leaflets for publicity, with topics covering 

“The Goodwill Mission Saluting to the Muslims”, “Islam in China”, 

“Japanese Aggression against China”, “China’s Resistance against 

the Japanese”, “The Hui People’s Sacrifice in the Anti-Japanese 

War”, and “Our Hope to the World Muslims”. 88  The Sino-Egyptian 

Cultural Council was established on April 20, 1938, with members 

Abdulhamid bin Said, director of the International Muslim Youth 

Society; M. Khalid bin Hassany, General Supervisor of Al-Azhar 

University; and three Hui students in Al-Azhar, Sha Guozhen, Pang 

Shiqian and Ma Jian. Two conferences in Egypt were extremely 

successful: one was the “Supporting China Day” held in Alexandria 

by the World Peace Campaign Egyptian Branch with its headquar -

ters at Cairo. This was held in Cairo on April 23, 1938, many elites 

participated in the conference, and many people gave enthusias -

tic speeches, and newspapermen took many photos. The next day, 

newspapers published the news, which aroused a new wave of the 

Egyptian people to boycott Japanese products. The Relieving Chi -

na Society Alexandria Branch held the second conference at Alex -

andria in April 23. 89  This society was originally established to sup -                   

> 84 Ibid, under the sub-title of “Visits to People ’s Societies and Organizations
> and Universities and Schools ”, p. 470.
> 85 Ibid, “List of the People ’s Societies and Organizations ”, p. 471.
> 86 Ibid, “List of Public Speeches ”and “List of Mosque Public Speeches ”, at p.
> 472 and p. 473 respectively.
> 87 Ibid, “List of Welcoming Meetings ”and “List of Tea Parties ”at p. 474 and
> 475 respectively.
> 88 Ibid, “Publicity Printings” , p. 478.
> 89 This is the translation by this article writer from Chinese original; he failed
> in finding the original English title of this society. The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 165 

port the Chinese by the British people in the early time of China’s 

Anti-Japanese War. More than 500 people participated in the con -

ference, most of who were from military, political and educational 

fields. Hearing of the heroic battles against the Japanese Army and 

the brutality of the Japanese soldiers, many people were moved 

to tears, and they shouted “Down with the Japanese imperialists!” 

“Long live China!” The fundraising activity following the speeches 

was very successful, and the entire donation was posted to China 

via the headquarters of the society in England. A third successful 

conference was the “China Fund Day” held on three successive 

days, July 7, 8, and 9, 1938 in Bombay, India. This was the anniver -

sary of the “July 7 Incident” that symbolized the entire outbreak 

of China’s Anti-Japanese War. The “Fund Day” was successful and 

donations by the Indian people were booming; besides, the Indi -

ans organized a clinical team and dispatched it to China. 90 

The first immediate consequence of the success of the Goodwill 

Mission to the Middle East was that it led two subsequent interna -

tional anti-Japanese publicities abroad, that is, the Chinese Islam -

ic Goodwill Mission to Southeast Asia and the Chinese Students 

Hajj Team to Mecca. The team-leader of the Goodwill Mission to 

Southeast Asia was a member of the Middle East Mission, Mr. Ma 

Tianying, with two Hui men, Wu Jianxun and Ma Dawu, who vis -

ited the Southeast Asian countries from the spring 1939 to August 

1940. They visited Singapore and many places in British Malaya, 

then Brunei and North Borneo (presently Sabah and Sarawak, 

Malaysia); they met many patriotic overseas Chinese, gave many 

speeches, and distributed many publicity materials. It was also 

successful: three “Sino-Malaya Cultural Associations” were estab -

lished, and the donations were big -the Hui established a hospital 

in Chongqing with the donation. 91                            

> 90 Wang Zengshan, “The General Report of the Chin ese Muslim Goodwill
> Mission to the Middle East” , pp. 476-77, under the sub.titles of “The World
> Peace Campaign and the Publicity Conference in Alexandra ”and “The
> Anniversary of the July 7 Incident in India ”respectively.
> 91 Hajjah Aliya Ma ,Haji Ibrahim T. Y. Ma, A Biography , Kuala Lumpur: The
> Muslim Welfare Organization of Malaysia, 1991 , pp. 165-66.
> This article says the source origin is from Ma Tianying, “Sun Yanyi shi he
> wo” (Sun Yanyi and I) in Islamic Light published in Kuala Lumpur, no. 74
> (August 31 ,1975) . This writer, however, cannot find its origin. As the book
> writer Hajjah Aliya Ma is the daughter of Hajji Ma Tianying, there is no
> doubt that she has the first-hand resource ; it must come from elsewhere. Wan LEI

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 166 

The Hui students in the Middle East also carried out their anti-

Japanese publicity activities. Pang Shiqian, a councilor of the Sino-

Egyptian Cultural Council, received a telegram from the Huijiao 

National Federation inside China via the Chinese embassy in Cairo 

on January 18, 1938. 92  The telegram urged him to organize a Hui 

student delegation to visit Mecca to perform pilgrimage, and at the 

same time to struggle against the so-called “China Huijiao Pilgrim -

age Delegation” dispatched by the puppet North China Council. 

“China Huijiao Pilgrimage Delegation” was a part of the Japanese 

program to “unite the Muslims” in China and abroad. The Japa -

nese sponsored the trip and Tang Yichen led the delegation, with 

the purpose of gaining publicity for the Japanese. 93  Pang success -

fully organized a 28-person team within a few days. Pang acted as 

the team leader and Ma Jian the vice team leader, they led the stu -

dent delegation for their publicity campaign in Mecca. They fol -

lowed the five members of the “China Huijiao Pilgrimage Delega -

tion” closely so to make the delegation feel embarrassed and not 

care anything. 94 

A second significance of the success of the Goodwill Mission was 

its impact on the Chinese people inside China. It encouraged the 

people to fight against the invaders and to struggle for their free -

dom. The Chinese Central News Agency, many newspapers, and 

magazines -Hui magazines in particular, such as the influential 

Weekly Bulletin of China Huijiao National Salvation Federation 

and  Yue Hwa  (Moon Light ) Magazine , followed the Goodwill Mis -

sion’s schedule to report their activities continuously, so that their 

activities abroad became publicity materials inside China. Even             

> 92 This date is given by Yu Zhengui & Yang Huaizhong in Zhongguo Yisilan
> wenxian zhu yi tiyao (Abstracts of Islamic Works and Translations in Chi -
> na ), Yinchuan: Ningxia renmin, 1993, p. 268. The end time was “February
> 20, 1938”. Pang Shiqian mistook the beginning date as “1939” (in fact, the
> 27th Year of the Republic). See “Diaries by a Farouk-Sponsored Chinese
> Student in Egypt” (Faluke liu Ai xuesheng guiguo riji) by Pang Shiqian,
> published in Yue Hwa , issue 12 (Beiping: 1947), p. 22.
> 93 “Biography of Pang Shiqian” in Bai Shouyi, The History of China’s Hui Hui
> Minzu , Beijing: zhonghua shuju, 2003, p. 1454.
> 94 Yu Zhengui, ““kangzhan qianai da houfang Huizu renshi de aiguo waijiao
> huodong” (The Patriotic Activities of the Huizu from the Rear-Areas dur -
> ing the Earlier Stage of the Anti-Japanese War) in the Nationalities Affairs
> Commission of Hebei Province, ed, Huizu kangri douzheng shi lunji (Col -
> lected Articles of the Hui’s Anti-Japanese Struggles ), Shijiazhuang: Hebei
> renmin, 1991, p. 173.

The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 167 

when they came back, their activities continued because many 

societies invited them to give speeches about their experiences 

abroad. 95  The government also held exhibitions to advertise their 

publicity achievements. 96 

The director of the China Huijiao National Salvation Federation 

summarized the achievements of the delegation and gave them 

high appraisal: 

“The Hui people, employing the cultural communications and people-

to-people diplomacy, gloriously started their mission to establish li -

aison with the international society. Such examples were those such 

as the overseas students dispatched by Beiping Chengda Teacher’s 

School and Shanghai Islamic Teacher’s School, and in the latest times, 

the Goodwill Mission to the Middle East, the Chinese [Students’] Hajj 

Delegation, and the Goodwill Mission to the Southeast Asia...... What 

they did is beneficial to the construction of the relationships between 

our country and the Islamic countries. In other words, they made their 

contributions to the international peace campaign.” 97 

VII. Conclusion 

During China’s Anti-Japanese War, the Hui energetically par -

ticipated in the Nationalist Army, fighting in its war zone with po -

sitional warfare, and in the Communist Army, fighting in its war 

zone with guerilla warfare. Their publicities broad, furthermore, 

actually formed independent third war zone. The Hui people dis -

played both their energy and their ethnic traits most impressively 

in the Anti-Japanese War. The war widened the perspective of the 

Hui from a restricted district or province to a national-wide scale. 

Furthermore, the anti-Japanese publicity of “The Chinese Islamic 

Goodwill Missions” to Middle East and to Southeast Asia widened 

the Hui field of vision from national to international level. In the 

95  For example, see  “Jindong Fangwentuan zhaodai xinwen jie ” (The Goodwill 

Mission to the Middle East Entertaining the Newsmen ” in  Weekly  Bulletin 

of China Huimin National Salvation Federation , no. 29 (March 10, 1939), 

p. 115. 

96  “Zhongguo Huijiao jindong fangwen tuan ji Da Pusheng ” (Exhibition of 

the Achievements Made by the Chinese Goodwill Mission to the  Middle 

East  and by Da Pusheng) in  Bulletin of  China  Huijiao National Salvation 

Federation , vol. 3, issue 9 (Chongqing: July 1941), p. 5. 

97  Bai Chongxi, “Fan qinlue yu Huijiao wenhua” (Resistance against Aggres -

sion and Islamic Culture” in  Huijiao Wenhua  (Islamic Culture ), vol. 1, issue 

1 (Chongqing: 1941), pp. 2-3. Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 168 

past, they struggled against  the Manchu and the Han authorities; 

today, they realized that they had to fight shoulder to shoulder with 

their previous rivals against a common and cruel enemy, the Japa -

nese aggressors. Never had the Hui so fully interacted nationally 

with its own people and with the Han and other peoples in China, 

and internationally with the people of Middle East and Southeast 

Asia. The interactions accelerated their awakening with a modern -

ist sense for considering their status and position in China. 

The Hui culture is a combination of two great traditions: the 

Chinese and the Islamic. The Chinese element of the Hui culture 

decided the Hui loyalty to China. Examples of their loyalty were 

not only in the Republican era, but also in dynastic times. The 

Hui, scattering across China, are bound to the Chinese soil and to 

China’s national fate. In fact, the Hui people have strong “master-

hood” consciousness as Chinese people, or as a group of people in 

China, in case the term “Chinese” might lead to any misinterpreta -

tion. This characteristic seems outstanding in comparison with Is -

lamic ethnic minorities in some other countries, and need further 

researches to explore the causes. 

The Hui built a bridge of Sino-Mideast communications. During 

the long history of the Hui people in China, they enjoyed their cul -

tural revivals several times; each time, it relied on communications 

with the Middle East. During the Anti-Japanese War, to save their 

country, the Hui headed to the Middle East one more time, where 

it became one of their battlefields. The Hui activities in the Middle 

East during the Anti-Japanese War were not only war stories but 

also a good exemplification for anthropological studies of the Hui 

people in China for their integrity of the intercommunications be -

tween the two civilizations, the Chinese and the Islamic. 

This author’s article just draws the general picture of the efforts 

made by the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission to the Middle East 

during the Anti-Japanese War. However, it relies primarily on Chi -

nese sources, particularly the Hui Muslims’ sources during the late 

1930s and naturally there is a lack of wholly sources of literature 

during the time. To make a better assessment of these public di -

plomacy efforts, Japanese accounts of the same events and more 

importantly literature in relation to local Turkish, Arabic, Persian 

and even English coverage are needed. Researching all these may 

be beyond the capacity of a single researcher, and may require col -The Chinese Islamic “Goodwill Mission to the Middle East” During the Anti-Japanese War 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 169 

laborative effort. Therefore, this article may be described as, as old 

Chinese saying states, “casting a brick to attract jadestone”; and 

this author definitely hopes more researchers of the similar re -

search field would enjoy local literature and generate more public 

discussions on the topic. 

Özet 

Japonya’ya Karşı Savaşta Çinli Müslümanların 

“Orta Doğu İyi Niyet Heyeti” 

Bu makale Çin (Huijiao) Federasyonu tarafından 1930’ların 

sonlarında Orta Doğu’ya gönderilen Hui “İyi Niyet 

Heyeti”nin faaliyetlerini ele almakta ve bu heyetin Çin’in 

Japonya’ya karşı kazandığı zaferdeki katkılarını özetleme -

ktedir. Çin’deki Müslüman azınlıktan biri olan Hui halkı 

tarafından başlatılan bu türden halklar arası diplomasi, Çin 

ile Orta Doğu ülkeleri arasındaki dostluğu geliştirmek başta 

olmak üzere pek çok açıdan büyük önem taşımaktadır. 

Ancak bu konu aynı alanda çalışan pek çok araştırmacı 

tarafından şimdiye kadar ihmal edilmiştir. 

Anahtar Kelimeler:  Orta Doğu İyi Niyet Heyeti, Japonya 

karşıtı Savaş, Çin Huijiao (İslam) Federasyonu, Hui halkı, 

Diplomasi. 

Main References 

1.  The North-China Herald  (English newspaper published in Shanghai): 

March 17, 1928  April 14, 1937 

July 28, 1928  Jan. 5, 1938 

Dec. 19, 1929  Jan. 22, 1938 

Jan. 18, 1933  Oct. 11, 1939 

2. Ma Tianying, ed.  Islamic Light  (Kuala Lumpur): 

no. 39 (September 1972); no. 74 (August 31 1975) 

3.  Yue Hwa  (Moonlight ): 

vol. 10, issue 5 (Guilin: 1938); vol. 11, combined issues 4-6 (Guilin:1939); 

issue 12 (Beiping: 1947) Wan LEI 

Dîvân 

2 0 1 0 / 2 

# 170 

4.  Weekly  Bulletin of China Huimin National Salvation Federation  (Zhongguo 

Huimin jiuguo xiehui zhoukan , Hankou: 1938; Chongqing: 1939): 

no. 14 (Nov. 18, 1938)  no. 18 (Dec. 16, 1938) 

no. 15 (Nov. 25, 1938)  no. 25 (Feb. 3, 1939) 

no. 17 (Dec. 9, 1938)  no. 29 (March 10, 1939) 

5.  Bulletin of China Huijiao National Salvation Federation (Zhongguo Huijiao 

jiuguo xiehui huikan , published in Chongqing): 

vol. 1, issue 3 (November 1, 1939) 

vol. 1, issue 4 (November 15, 1939) 

vol. 1, issue 5 (December 15, 1939) 

vol. 1, issue 8 (February 1, 1940) 

vol. 1, issue 10 (June 1940) 

vol. 2, issue 1 (April 15, 1940) 

vol. 2, issue 5 (June 15, 1940) 

vol. 2, combined issues 6-7 (July 1940) 

vol. 2, combined issues 10-11 (September 1940) 

vol. 3, issue 5 (March 1941) 

vol. 3, issue 6 (April 1941). 

vol. 3, issue 7 (May 1941) 

vol. 3, issue 9 (July 1941) 

6. Bai Shouyi,  The History of China’s Hui Hui Minzu  (Zhongguo Hui Hui Minzu 

shi ), Beijing: zhonghua shuju, 2003. 

7. Wang Zengshan, ed.,  Diaries of the Chinese Islamic Goodwill Mission to the 

Middle East  (Zhongguo Huijiao jindong fangwen tuan riji ) (First published 

in 1943), Publisher: Wang Erli of the Muslim Welfare Organization of Ma -

laysia. Kuala Lumpur: 1996. 

8. Wan Lei,  The Hui and the Republican Revolution, 1911-1949 . Unpublished 

PhD thesis, University of Malaya, 2009.
