# 'Goak here': A.J.P. Taylor and 'The Origins of the Second World War.'

Full Text:

"GOAK HERE": A.J.P. TAYLOR AND

THE ORIGINS OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR(1)

Alan John Percivale Taylor could never resist a dig. In the introduction to the second edition of The Origins of the Second World War he wrote that he "ought perhaps to have added `(goak here)' in the manner of Artemus Ward" to his characterization of the Munich settlement as "a triumph for all that was best and most enlightened in British life."(2) This reference hardly made the matter clearer for many readers, and Taylor seems to have spent a great deal of time explaining that Artemus Ward was a comedian of such uncertain talents that he wrote "goak here" on his scripts -- a misspelling of "joke" -- so that no one would miss the punch line.(3)

As I write, thirty-five years have passed since the publication of Taylor's classic and controversial book. The Origins has had a long career in the [historiography](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'Historiography'") of appeasement; indeed, something of a cottage industry in attacking and defending its central theses has grown up around it.(4) If it is not true, as Taylor claimed, that his book has become the new orthodoxy, there is more justice in his claim that "every historian cashes in on my views, perhaps without realizing that he is doing so."(5) And yet, for all the buckets of ink and forests of trees that have been devoted to Taylor over three and a half decades, the central problem raised by his book remains that suggested by his reference to poor Artemus Ward@ How should we read Taylor? What is his punch line?

This essay is divided into three sections. The first section considers "the origins of the Origins," Taylor's work and thought on questions of war and diplomacy through the late 1950s. The second section examines Taylor's historical method as it can be divined from both his historical writings and his autobiographical comments. In the concluding section I consider several fundamental criticisms of Taylor's argument, and I attempt to demonstrate how Taylor's style and intellectual preoccupations combined to create such a startling book.

In a typical aside toward the end of the Origins, nearly buried in a long paragraph on Hitler's intentions for the year 1993 Taylor wrote:

Many however believe that Hitler was a modern Attila, loving

destruction for its own sake and therefore bent on war without

thought of policy. There is no arguing with such dogmas ... But

his policy is capable of rational explanation; and it is on these that

history is built ... At any rate, this is a rival dogma which is

worth developing, if only as an academic exercise.(6) (Emphasis

Added).

I submit that this passage provides the interpretative key to Taylor's difficult book. I will argue that what Taylor gave us was not so much a straightforward historical narrative as a brilliantly constructed admonitory fable that operates on levels other than the literal.

I

Taylor was born in 1906 in Lancashire. Throughout his life he made much of this background: the northern upbringing, the family of successful Quaker cotton manufacturers, his parents' radical-liberal politics. He was educated at the Quaker school of Bootham and at Oriel College, Oxford, where he took a first in history. Taylor then spent two years studying in Vienna under the nominal direction of A.F. Pribam, who, like so many historians of the day, had turned his professional attention to the origins of the First World War. On Pribram's recommendation Taylor secured a teaching position at the University of Manchester, where he became a protege of Sir Lewis Namier -- perhaps the first person to teach him something of the craft of the practising historian. Namier had a powerful influence on Taylor, making him, as Sisman writes, "a tougher, more rigorous thinker."(7) Taylor himself admitted that he might not have pressed on with his historical career were it not for Namier.(8) In 1938 Taylor was appointed a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was to remain, in one capacity or another, for the remainder of his career.

Taylor was an historian of great range and prodigious output. His major books include The Italian Problem in European Diplomacy 1847-1849;(9) The Habsburg Monarchy, 1815-1918;(10) The Course of [German History](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'German history'");(11) The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848-1918;(12) The Troublemakers: Dissent Over Foreign Policy, 1792-1939,(13) and English History, 1914-1945.(14) To a greater or lesser degree all of these books were written in Taylor's sharp, witty, epigrammatical style; and they often reached surprising or perverse conclusions. But none of them -- not even all of them together, as Taylor said(15) -- caused as much controversy and stimulated as much other work and thought as did his Origins.

The main arguments of the Origins are familiar and will not be restated here at length. The book is essentially a continuation of Taylor's earlier (and well-received) diplomatic history, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe. In the Origins Taylor picks up the story with the end of the First World War, which "explains the second and, in fact, caused it, in so far as one event causes another."(16) He then surveys, with remarkable concision and narrative brio, the twenty-year course of interwar diplomacy. Of course, what shocked readers in 1961 was Taylor's apparent attribution of responsibility for the outbreak of war in 1939 to nearly everyone or anything but Hitler: to Versailles, to reparations, to Neville Chamberlain, to Jozef Beck, to blunders on all sides rather than evil intentions -- a tendency memorably encapsulated in Taylor's conclusion that "it seems from the record that [Hitler] became involved in war through launching on 29 August a diplomatic manoeuvre which he ought to have launched on 28 August."(17)

Taylor often claimed, and more vehemently after the Origins controversy broke, that he had been an anti-Nazi and an anti-appeaser from the moment of Hitler's rise to power.(18) This is not strictly true. In fact, the political cause that interested Taylor in the early 1930s was disarmament, and he served frequently as a speaker for the Manchester Peace Council. His break with the Peace Council came in 1936 when he denounced the German re-occupation of the Rhineland at a public meeting and argued that it was time to re-arm. Taylor was similarly provoked by the Munich accord. Taking again to the public platform, as he told it, "I tried every argument: national honour, anti-fascism, Hitler's weakness and the certainty he would climb down. Always came the reply `What you are advocating means war. We want peace'."(19)

It was also in the 1930s that Taylor first became active as a journalist. At Namier's recommendation Taylor began writing book reviews for the Manchester Guardian in 1934, and he developed a particular specialty in writing occasional pieces to mark the anniversaries of notable historic events. In 1938 he took to writing leaders as well. The student of Taylor's work might well wish that the leaders were signed. Did Taylor write about Munich? Certainly the Guardian viewed the accord with a more sceptical eye than Taylor later remembered.(20) A Guardian leader concluded in the wake of the accord:

In terms of power politics it seems to mean the crumbling of a

"democratic front" ... It must be said that Mr. Duff Cooper's

resignation strongly suggests ... that Mr. Chamberlain has

nothing to offer us except the timid hope that he can save our

skins by keeping in with the dictators at no matter whose

expense.(21)

The style and the mention of Duff Cooper suggest Taylor's hand. When the Conservative first lord of the admiralty and biographer of Haig resigned, he received an adulatory letter from Taylor the avowed socialist.

It is of course far from uncommon for historians to offer judgements on the past with one eye firmly fixed on their own times; but Taylor took this practice farther than most, a point which will be stressed in this essay with respect to the Origins. One can find this characteristic in Taylor, s earliest writings. In 1938 he published Germany's First Bid For Colonies 1884-1885: A Move in Bismarck's European Policy. Of British diplomacy fifty years before his time, Taylor wrote:

The average Englishman was ashamed of the British Empire and

believed (quite wrongly) that it had been acquired in some wicked

fashion . . . This sense of sin placed British governments at a

disadvantage in their dealings with Germany; they were

convinced of the justice of German grievances even before the

grievances were expressed ... there they stood, ears anxiously

cocked for the next German complaint ... Granville's letters to

Herbert Bismarck -- my dear fellow, what can be wrong? -- are

not unique in the record of British policy, and if the dear fellow

insists on this or at as the price of renewing eternal friendship,

of course he must have it.(22)

Taylor later denied that this assessment had anything to do with Chamberlain's government, on the basis that he had finished the book before the question of German colonies was raised.(23) "Goak here," he might have added. The significance of this passage in the context of the late 1930s went well beyond the question of German colonies, and a man as politically engaged as Taylor could hardly have overlooked the striking contemporary implications of what he was saying. Certainly the point was not lost on contemporary readers and reviewers.(24)

A major element of virtually all of Taylor's historiography was his antipathy to Germany and Germans, a tendency most clearly demonstrated by his Course of German History, published in 1945. In its pages, unencumbered by footnotes or bibliography, Taylor delivered such pronouncements as "It was no more a mistake for the German People to end up with Hitler than it is an accident when a river flows into the sea," and "It is unnecessary for any individual to indict the Germans; they have indicted themselves."(25) But most of Taylor's work was coloured by similar sentiments. The ant-German animus appears in Taylor's work on the Habsburgs, in the Struggle for Mastery in Europe, and in the Origins itself; witness Taylor's characteristically tart assessment of the balance of responsibility between Hitler and the German people as a whole:

It seems to be believed nowadays that Hitler did everything

himself, even driving the trains and filling the gas chambers

unaided. This was not so. Hitler was a sounding board for the

German nation. Thousands, many hundred thousand, Germans

carried out his evil orders without qualm or question.(26)

Such passages make it difficult to see how the Origins could have been read as an apology either for Hitler or for Germany.

Although Taylor never abandoned his suspicions of Germany, his views on interwar diplomacy began to evolve in more surprising directions after 1948. His focus on German ambitions as the primary dynamic element in European diplomacy became increasingly overlaid by a newer sense of the contingency and unpredictability of events in the 1930s. If one reads through Taylor's reviews and occasional essays from 1948 until the publication of the Origins, one may be surprised that his arguments did not cause a controversy until 1961. He could not have signalled more clearly where he was going; throughout the 1950s, in such publications as the New Statesman and the Manchester Guardian, Taylor stated and restated all of the most controversial claims of the Origins. Moreover, many of these essays were collected and published in book form while still fresh.(27) Why, then, was anyone surprised by the Origins? Another essay could be written on the theme of what it takes to create an historiographical controversy; for now it is enough to show that Taylor's arguments had a long gestation period.

By 1948, for instance, Taylor was already considering the possibility that Hitler was more an opportunist than a calculating would-be world conqueror. In a review of Namier's Diplomatic Prelude, one of the early postwar books on prewar diplomacy, Taylor concluded:

Certainly Hitler aimed at German domination of Europe; but he,

too, went about this in a most blundering way and, as Namier

shows, was quite taken aback at the end when he found that,

against all expectations, England and France were really going

to war.(28)

Also in 1948, in another New Statesman article entitled "Munich Ten Years After," Taylor argued that the guilt for appeasement was common to all Englishmen and that the political leaders of the late 1930s should not be deemed the sole (and in Chamberlain's case, conveniently posthumous) scapegoats. Taylor even went to the wholly atypical length of admitting a past error: "I, for one, look back with shame to the university lectures ... I gave before the German occupation of the Rhineland brought me to my senses."(29)

On the other hand, his articles of 1948 and 1949 still showed some touches of the more "conventional" view that he later would abandon. In the Munich article he wrote that the conference held few mysteries for the historian: "we know, for instance, that Hitler intended all along to destroy Czechoslovakia and that the Sudeten grievances were humbug."(30) (Taylor obligingly provided a fascinating contrast to this article when he wrote "Munich Twenty Years After" for the Manchester Guardian: "The Czech crisis was made in London not in Berlin Hitler had indeed visions of world conquest but no defined plan.")(31) In a review of a book by Elizabeth Wiskemann entitled The Rome-Berlin Axis, Taylor said of Hitler and Mussolini, "Of course, both men were lunatics."(32) In a review of Hjalmar Schacht's memoirs he dismissed Schacht's suggestion that all would have been well if Germany had been excused reparations and granted equality of armaments."(33) And he could still be strongly moralistic in his condemnation of Munich: "When a policy tastes wrong, one should spit it out."(34)

At the end of the 1940s the diplomatic documents of the interwar period began to be published in various national series. Taylor read and reviewed most of the publications as they came out. It seems to have been his reading of these documents, especially the German ones, that caused him to begin rethinking the origins of the war. Did Hitler really intend to destroy Czechoslovakia in 1938 and 1939? No -- the German documents told Taylor that the occupation of Prague was forced on Hitler by the Slovakians. More than ten years before the publication of the Origins, Taylor wrote of Prague, "Hitler took the decisive step in his career without realizing that it was decisive or indeed noticing that he had made it."(35) Did the Hossbach memorandum prove Hitler planned a world war? No -- Taylor wrote in 1949 that:

[The Hossbach memorandum] is evidence that [Hitler] was a

violent and unscrupulous man; it is not evidence that he had any

concrete projects, and his prophecy of events bears little relation

to what actually happened.(36)

Why did people accept the conventional wisdom? Well, said Taylor, the Nuremberg trials "with their irrelevant standards [had] bedevilled the study of contemporary history."(37) and "the causes this time were easy to find -- almost too easy. Hitler and Mussolini had planned war ... even the Germans acquiesced in this conclusion."(38) These comments, too, predate the Origins by more than a decade.

Taylor being Taylor, he did not follow a consistent line on war origins through the 1950s, any more than he did within the covers of one book. He worked out his revisionist viewpoint in fits and starts. At times in the early 1950s one could find him still upholding the straightforward anti-German view of the 1930s resister, as in his derisory review of Freidriche Meinecke's The German Catastrophe.(39) At other times he seemed to be trying on revisionist arguments that he did not later pursue, such as his suggestion that the Munich conference was the decisive moment in which a previously fluid situation gave way to the inevitability of war: "What happened in 1939 was an epilogue, the working out of a tragedy on pre-determined lines."(40) In his reviews, as in his historical writing, Taylor allowed his short-term epigrammatical needs, rather than any theoretical grand design, to dictate his conclusions -- rather like the statesmen whom his work portrayed. But his constant questioning of every assumption about the war, and his willingness to consider almost any explanation of its origins, was conspicuous.

By the mid-1950s Taylor was focusing more clearly on the thesis that it was the disastrous coincidence of German opportunism and British blunders that resulted in war in 1939. Reviewing published German documents in 1956, he wrote: "This is not a record of planning for an inevitable war, but a story of passive drift, waiting for something to turn up." The British guarantee to Poland was "one of the greatest [blunders] ever made in the history of diplomacy."(41) By 1955 a plaintive tone could be heard in his work now and again -- Taylor was getting bored with it all. In that year he reviewed a book by Walther Hoffer entitled War Premeditated, perhaps not a title certain to spark Taylor's admiration. In a comment highly revealing of what interested him and what did not, Taylor wrote of Hoffer's argument: "Nothing could be more boring. One asks at every page: `Why do I have to read this all over again? What is there that has not been said before?'"(42) For Taylor, one senses, the question was not rhetorical. Accepted and familiar ideas did bore him. In the Origins he suggested in characteristic fashion that he had lost interest in drawing up indictments of the appeasers from over-long experience in the 1930s.(43)

And then, of course, there was Taylor's reverence for devil's advocacy, for dissent in any form. Taylor was not a kind reviewer of history books -- except when he had a dissenter on his hands. In 1952 he reviewed a book on Roosevelt's foreign policy in which the author argued that the [United States](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'United States'") should have backed [Japan](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'Japan'") against China, and stood by while Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union destroyed each other. Quite wrong, said Taylor -- but a good effort:

A democratic foreign policy is possible only if its background and

assumptions are constantly discussed. Even in the courts of

Heaven there was a devil's advocate. Though the revisionist case

in regard to the Second World War seems pretty good nonsense

to our eyes, it is worth remembering that most English historians

were revisionist after 1918@ ... Books which support our current

assumptions are all very well; but we also need books which

challenge them.(44)

Another sort of tone began to appear in Taylor's writing in 1958, as cold war politics and the spectre of nuclear war began to haunt Taylor's view of the 1930s. In "Munich Twenty Years After" he concluded:

Has the story a moral? An obvious one: no deal with Hitler was

ever possible. But he was a human phenomenon who occurs once

in a thousand years. Appeasement was a sensible course, even

though it was tried with the wrong man; and it remains the noblest

word in the diplomatist's vocabulary.(45)

Indeed, the reader of the Origins should not forget that its author was a founding member of, and active campaigner for, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament during the very years that he was researching and writing the book. Disarmament was, in fact, a goal which Taylor pursued with quite uncharacteristic consistency from the early 1930s through his academic swan song, the 1981 Romanes lectures. Even his writing on the subject was, I think, gentler in style and more heart-felt than most of his work. He once wrote of his time with the C.N.D. that it was "the only public cause to which I devoted myself wholeheartedly and, I think, the one worthy thing I have done in my life."(46) In his autobiography Taylor remembered that his old Bootham history master told him after a C.N.D. campaign speech, "A.J., I know you don't believe in god, but god spoke through you tonight." It was, said Taylor, the proudest moment of his life, and his master's words reduced him to tears.(47)

Such then, was the background that Taylor brought to the writing of the Origins: An extensive knowledge and experience of writing about Central European diplomacy; a concern with Germany's place in Europe, expressed both in his historical work and his political activities; a conversion to a view of Hitler as something other than the determined madman of popular conception; and a passionate commitment to nuclear disarmament, coupled with a conviction that wars arose from politicians' blunders and that "one day the deterrent, whatever it may be, will fail to deter."(48) These historiographical and ideological tendencies were coupled with a lifelong willingness to question any received wisdom and try on any argument, however eccentric. The Origins was not a sudden departure for Taylor. It followed logically from his principal preoccupations, and from thirty years of study and thought.

II

Taylor was a difficult customer. His contrary nature is the fundamental quality that shine through everything he wrote. The lover of irony, of shocking conclusions, of the sharp turn of phrase -- this is the essential Taylor, whether as an historian, journalist, or an analyst of his own work. It is difficult to piece together a coherent count of what he thought about questions of historical methodology, of the importance of reading and writing history, or of his own work, precisely because of his contrary nature. He was, in the literary critic's phrase, an "unreliable narrator." Typically, and contrarily, he denied his own contrariness:

I am not at all paradoxical ... The reason people think that I am

paradoxical, if they do think that, is that I have a clear and sharp

style. And I can't see that there is any harm in having a clear and

sharp style.(49)

And:

I have no delight, impish or otherwise, in shocking readers. I

don't care one way or the other. I put down what seems to me

right without worrying whether it is orthodox or shocking.

Readers who insist on being shocked have only themselves to

blame.(50)

But in more honest moments, paradoxically once again, he could admit his love of upsetting expectations. In 1948, at a "Congress of Intellectuals" in Wroclaw, Poland, he surprised his audience by delivering a "dyed in the wool conservative" addressed. Later he confessed to a colleague that he had always dreamed of doing so.(51) Many years later he wrote to his wife:

... after all I was sure to make some anti-Soviet remark in

Moscow, just as I make anti-British remarks in London and

would make anti-American remarks in America, if I were ever

fool enough to go there.(53)

In his autobiography he told a wonderful story about his father:

But surely he was a great romancer, and not only with me. If he

turned right on leaving the house in order to buy a newspaper, he

would tell my mother on his return that he had turned left in order

to buy tobacco. I asked him why he did this, and he said, "It

makes things more interesting."(53)

As Taylor seemed to imply, this story could serve as a parable for his own historical work (recall the phrase in the Origins "If only as an academic exercise"). And in his autobiography he wrote "You can never believe what the Taylors say."(54)

One can also not read Taylor's comments on his own work without being struck by the explicit link he drew between a scholar's life and work. The following comment is typical, and not only for its hyperbole:

The historian or scientist does well to lead a [professionally]

dedicated life; yet, however dedicated, he remains primarily a

citizen. To turn from political responsibility to dedication is to

open the door to tyranny and measureless barbarism.(55)

There is another implication of this linking of life and work. To Taylor, one purchased the legitimacy of one's historical positions through active engagement in the issues of the day. This attitude was implicit in the many comments he made about his critics. Taylor believed that he had earned the right to say whatever he wanted to about the war because of his political activity before it. The same could not be said of his critics. In the Origins itself he noted that "to the best of my recollection, those who now display indignation against me were not active on the public platform" in the 1930s.(56) He could be more vitriolic about Americans:

What right have American historians especially to criticize me

when their own country would never have entered the war if

Hitler had not casually declared war on it?(57)

Taylor therefore saw himself as one of the few historians qualified both by training and prewar record to write the book he did. Apart from himself, he thought the few prewar resisters were too busy basking in their vindication to bother questioning the assumptions on which their actions in the 1930s had been based; and it hardly seemed permissible in Taylor's eyes for an ex-appeaser to write about the question one way or the other. It is interesting, then, to note his defensiveness about his war service, or rather lack thereof. When he wrote his memoirs he appeared to have forgotten how many Oxford colleagues and students enlisted early in the war. Taylor, young enough for military service, contented himself with a short spell in the Home Guard and some M. O. I. speech-making.(58)

Another characteristic element of Taylor's historical method could be called his "artistic" approach to writing and research. Like political engagement, artistry is an enduring theme in his extra-historical writings and comments. "I am more an artist than a scholar," he said;(59) and for Taylor the real stuff of history was intuitive, perhaps even imaginative. He relied on a gardening metaphor to characterize the proper intuitive skill of the historian -- "green-fingers." In his autobiography he distinguished himself from Namier on precisely this ground. Namier, he said, believed in labourious research; Taylor relied on his intuition. "My critics", he said, "complain that I have relied too much on my green fingers and often merely guessed. In retrospect I think I have relied on my green fingers too little."(60)

His models, too, were literary writers, not historians, or at least not academic ones. He wrote that he learned more from Wells' Outline of History than from anything else. He acquired his style from Shaw -- "I fell under the spell of his style."(61) "Shaw and Butler," Taylor wrote, "were the main sources of my inspiration"(62)

The influence of Shaw is worth more consideration than most commentators on Taylor have given it. Shaw, too, wrote about the origins of a war. His pamphlet, "Common Sense and the War," ("a title more than usually impertinent" said Taylor, no doubt with affection)(63) appeared in November 1914, as a supplement to The New Statesman. It had a contemporary impact on Taylor's life: he later remembered that Shaw's argument shocked his father out of his support for the Liberal government of H.H. Asquith and Sir Edward Grey and launched him on the path to becoming a gentleman socialist.(64) The parallels between Shaw's version of war origins and Taylor's are striking. Shaw emphasized the uniqueness of his own intellectual and emotional detachment, a product of his Irish ability to view the English as foreign, much as Taylor emphasized his northern and Nonconformist roots. Like Taylor, Shaw thought that "the time has now come to talk and write soberly about the war."(65) And like Taylor, Shaw had a fine eye for irony and paradoxical results, as in his rejection of militarism:

...Austria has been beaten repeatedly: by France: by Italy, by

Germany, almost by everybody who has thought it worthwhile

to have a whack at her; and yet she is one of the Great Powers,

and her alliance has been sought by invincible Germany.(66)

Like Taylor, Shaw had read the published diplomatic documents and trusted himself to interpret them in a way that they had not been theretofore ("All this is recorded in the language of diplomacy ... that language is not so straightforward as my language; but in the crucial points it is clear enough").(67) He gave the starring role to the machinations of a British statesman, Foreign Secretary Sir Edward Grey, rather than to German aggression. In a very Taylorian argument he noted that we give the benefit of the doubt to our own statesman but not to others, and he argued that the "Junker" Grey was as much responsible for the war as were the Junkers of Germany.(68) And like Taylor fifty years later, Shaw's account of war origins set off a tremendous controversy.

In a book about the Englishmen whom he "most revered", Taylor offered an explanation of Shaw's motives in writing "Common Sense" which, again, sounds as descriptive of Taylor as it does of Shaw:

Shaw enjoyed pricking moral pretensions; he also enjoyed teasing

his fellow Dissenters. On the other hand he wished to be secure

from the attentions of the police and to be received as an

honoured guest at GHQ. Supporting the war on immoral grounds

satisfied his requirements exactly.(69)

Taylor was indeed under the spell of Shaw's style. I would go farther and argue that in writing the Origins he had Shaw as a primary model.

Literary influences affected Taylor in other ways as well. He often likened reading history to reading a novel: " ... the writings of an historian are no good unless readers get the same pleasure from them as they do from a novel."(70) He characterized himself as a narrative historian who believed that the first function of an historian was to answer the child's question "What happened next?"(71) It is difficult to imagine embarking on a sustained inquiry into "structural" factors in history through the use of such an approach, and indeed Taylor had little use for what he called "profound causes":

I have a blank spot in my mind about such things ... Other

historians use these concepts, and no doubt they are right - we

should never get through the stuff otherwise. I'm just not good

at it.(72)

He criticized Namier for "taking the mind out of history" and explained, "thinking myself, I assume that others think as well."(73) Taylor acknowledged his approach was dated, but here he found (not surprisingly) a paradox:

The framework [of my books] is strictly conventional - old

fashioned history, as one reviewer recently called it. But the ideas

stuffed into the framework do not conform to accepted views ...

I am a traitor within the gates.(74)

Part and parcel of this intuitive, narrative approach was a rather aristocratic disdain for thorough research. Taylor often said that he disliked repeating things, especially when they were clear - he said something once and went on. He could admit to being cavalier about sources:

I have never discovered any message in the writing of history

other than the one enunciated by President Routh of Magdalen

when he was over ninety years old: "Always verify your references" - hardly

a justification for my life, especially as I have

often failed to observe it.(75)

Taylor was willing to take considerable risks. The very writing of the Origins, in view of the paucity of documentation at the time, was risky, as he acknowledged in his first chapter.(76) Elsewhere, he wrote "I get a reputation for being slightly careless, but this is deliberate. If you wait until every detail is right you will produce nothing."(77) Ved Mehta heard him argue in a lecture that error can often be fertile, but perfection is always sterile.(78) This attitude was very much of a piece with his emphasis on intuition and his narrative style. The details of sources and proof came a distant second to the important matter of the interpretation and explanation of why things happened as they did. If the interpretation happened to be wrong, it could still be fruitful in provoking further thought; and it could still be fun.

Finally, there is Taylor's approach to questions of morality in history. In his autobiography he disclaimed any allegiance to moral principles, stating that he was "a nihilist for good or bad." The curious exception to this lack of principles - and he said this three times - was that he believed strongly in the sanctity of contract, which is probably worthy of another Taylorian "goak here."(79) In the Origins he disavowed any concern with the moral rights and wrongs of appeasement and resistance, of Versailles or Munich. He wrote not "as a judge," but simply out of historical curiosity, to find out what happened and why.(80) No doubt it was in part this amoral pose that aroused so much critical ire; but like so many of Taylor's assertions about himself and his work, it must be taken with a good helping of salt. Certainly his denunciations of Hitler, in the very same introductory "Second Thoughts" in which Taylor denied that he sought to make moral judgements about appeasement, did not lack a moral focus. His characteristic anti-German stance stemmed from a moral interpretation of the wrongs of that history. In an interview with Med Vehta he admitted:

My book can be read in two ways. in one way, it may sort of

exonerate Hitler by saying that the war was a mistake, in another,

by letting Hitler off the hook, it may make all Germans responsible

for the war.(81)

The second of these options, at least, is certainly in keeping with the Taylor of The Course of German History, and the question of responsibility for the war, as for any human event which claims a large number of lives, is inescapably a moral consideration. Taylor was, after all, a lifelong socialist of one stripe or another, and he maintained a passionate and lifelong commitment to disarmament. As a child of privilege he would hardly have arrived at socialist inclinations without a moral critique of capitalism, nor at his views on disarmament without a fierce moral opposition to militarism. Nonetheless the amoral pose remained, and the apparent quest after moral impartiality was a major thread in Taylor's historical work.

A love of paradox and controversy; a belief in the inseparability of the historian's work from his engagement in current politics; a methodology that stressed intuition and narration over labourious research and "profound" analysis; and a veneer of moral objectivity masking a profoundly moralistic approach: these were the core elements of Taylor's historical style. Added together they go a long way to explaining how such a book as the Origins came to be written. Thirty-five years after its publication, what should we make of the book?

III

The contemporary debate over the Origins was fierce, even by the standards of a decade rich in controversy among historians of modem Europe. The Observer called it "an almost faultless masterpiece," a judgement preserved to this day on the cover of the paperback edition. On the other hand vitriolic letters poured in to periodicals such as the Times Literary Supplement and Encounter. Taylor debated his arch-rival, the Regius Professor Hugh Trevor-Roper, not only in print (in a rejoinder to Trevor-Roper's criticisms cheekily entitled "How to Quote: Exercises for Beginners"(82), but on television. He replied blithely to a stream of hostile letters in the T.L.S.: "I must however thank your correspondents for the free publicity which they have given to my book."(83) And when he wrote the misnamed preface "Second Thoughts" for the 1963 edition of the Origins, Taylor showed no loss of argumentative vigour.

But over time his enthusiasm for the book cooled. In 1970 he complained that he had to keep up with the Origins because people were always arguing and asking about it: "It seems to me very simple but not very exciting."(84) Two years later he wrote that he thought it was not an important book and that he had erred in ending his account in 1939 and not 1941. By then Taylor bad decided that it was the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour and Hitler's attack on the Soviet Union that led to the real world war.(85) By the time of his 1983 autobiography he considered the Origins to be "a period piece of limited value,"(86) and concluded: "I said of The Origins of the Second World War that I was trying to present the subject as it would appear to an historian fifty years hence. I do not now think that I succeeded."(87) If after twenty years the book did not please its creator, should we continue to find in it something of value?

There is still no clear consensus among historians on Taylor's work. In reading recent assessments of it one is struck by the extremes of adulation and denigration that one encounters. His [biographers](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'Biographers'"), not surprisingly, have pitched their tents in the former camp. Sisman goes so far as to say of the Origins that it is "... perhaps the most perfect of all his writings, so simple and clear that its conclusions come as a shock. The style alone - sparse, laconic, controlled - makes it worth reading."(88) Robert Cole, author of a more sober intellectual biography of Taylor, accepts Taylor's self-assessment that his views of war origins have become the orthodoxy, noting that writers such as Lord Bullock have adopted some elements of the "Hitler as improviser" theory.(89) And Gordon Martel, the editor of a collection of essays on the Origins controversy published to mark its twenty-fifth anniversary, writes that:

Taylor too has chosen to make a morality play of the inter war

years. But unlike his predecessors, the play he has written bears

the signs of genius ... his work will endure if only because he

rescued this vital part of the human story from the vapid simplicities

of good versus evil and returned it to its proper place of

complexity and paradox.(90)

At the other extreme are those criticisms which bear the stamp of moral disapproval and, perhaps, betray the effects of Taylor's personal unpopularity at Oxford. An indication of the fury Taylor can arouse even from beyond the grave is a recent article by the Oxford historian A.L. Rowse. Misleadingly entitled "A.J.P. Taylor as Historian,"(91) Rowse's piece is in fact an embarrassing personal attack which would be libellous were Taylor still alive. One of the tamer of Rowse's judgements is that Taylor is "disqualified" as a serious historian. The most scurrilous concerns Taylor's "unevenness":

It wasn't drink. I now realise that it was psychotic and incurable

... altogether it is a sad story. One should expect integrity above

all from a historian. The word never appears in Taylor's vast,

confused, self-contradictory output - let alone the quality. In that

he is characteristic of - and contributed his share to - the

society of our time, without standards, going down the drain.(92)

There are many more substantive grounds on which Taylor's arguments could be, and have been, challenged. Martel's volume provides an excellent and still comparatively recent collection of articles comparing Taylor's account of interwar diplomacy to more recent historiography informed by considerable evidence not available in 1961. Such a book length treatment is necessary to do justice to the many nuances of policy in Italy, Japan, and the U.S.A., not to mention [Great Britain](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'Great Britain'") and Germany. In this essay I would like to focus on three criticisms which, I submit, are not matters of detail but, rather, fundamental problems of Taylor's writing and argument which go to the heart of his method and conclusions.

Taylor's critics generally begin by conceding to him a large patch of ground. They are confident they know what Taylor is saying; this is why they are annoyed. I will start with a more fundamental criticism. The first difficulty which Taylor presents his reader is that of determining exactly where he has chosen to stand his ground.

What caused the war? This is, after all, the hub of the matter. But listen to Taylor on this question. On Hitler: "He supplied a powerful dynamic element, but it was fuel to an existing engine ... Most of all he was the creation of German history and of the German present."(93) In Chapter 2, Taylor tells us that it was the First World War that caused the Second, In so far as one event causes another."(94) Then in Chapter 3 he writes, "More than anything else, [reparations] cleared the way for the second World war."(95) In Chapter 5, Taylor concludes that the occupation of the Rhineland was "a double turning point. It opened the door for Germany's success. It also opened the door for her ultimate failure."(96) Chapter 6 opens with a long digression on Taylor's theory of historical causation; he goes on to tell us that "the cause of the war was therefore as much the blunders of others as the wickedness of the dictators themselves." In Chapter 7 Taylor suggests that Hitler would not have conceived of moving into Austria or the Sudetenland had it not been for Lord Halifax's 1937 visit to Berlin, made at Chamberlain's insistence - and therefore Chamberlain is an obvious candidate for having given Hitler the first push toward war.(97) Annexing Austria was "the first step in the policy which was to brand [Hitler] the greatest of all [war criminals](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'War criminals'")," and yet it was a step he took unknowingly,(98) later Taylor tells us that Hitler took the decisive step of his career when he occupied Prague.(99) By the time we reach August of 1939, Taylor is claiming that the mistaken impression (on whose part?) that the Ribbentrop-Molotov pact reduced British policy to ruins "did as much as anything else to cause the second world war."(100) Finally, Taylor concludes Chapter 11, and his book, with the assessment "It seems from the record that [Hitler] became involved in a war through launching on 29 August a diplomatic manoeuvre which he ought to have launched on 28 August."(101) So there we are: It was something about Germany; it was Hitler; it was Chamberlain; it was the Great War; it was foreordained; it was an accident - everything and nothing. In the selection of all these apparently decisive factors, one can see the consequences of Taylor's method and style. He can never resist reaching for an epigram, even at the cost of contradicting the epigram on the preceding page.

But most critics have felt that they knew their Taylor well enough to diagnose the faults in his account. Perhaps the most obvious of the available criticisms is that based on the documentary evidence.(102) Look at Mein Kampf, the critics say, look at the Hossbach memorandum, look at Hitler's speeches - to Nazi party rallies, to his [generals](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'Generals'"), to selected reporters. All tell the same story. Germany needed living space, and Hitler would not shrink from a war with anyone, with Czechoslovakia or the U.S.S.R. or France or Britain, to get it. The documents show that Hitler planned a major war all along.

Taylor attempts to dance away from every bit of documentary evidence. Hitler had no plans, Taylor argues, the dictator was incapable of making them. Mein Kampf was nothing more than recycled beer hall chatter. The Hossbach memorandum, in which Hitler appeared to set forth several scenarios for a coming war with Czechoslovakia, France, and Britain,(103) was of highly dubious provenance;(104) and anyway, insofar as it represented anything at all concerning Hitler's intentions, it was a record of a domestic political manoeuvre aimed at Hjalmar Schacht and other top level non-Nazis.(105) When Hitler addressed his generals and ordered them to prepare for war, as he did for instance on 23 May 1939, "he talked for effect, not to reveal the workings of his mind"(106) (whatever that means); and the record of the 23 May speech "is now known to be a forgery."(107) And in any case, what would Hitler tell his generals to do but prepare for war@ That is what generals are for. If "we were (wrongly) to judge political intentions from military plans, the British government would appear set on war with Germany, not the other way around."(108)

In 1961 it was Taylor's rival and nemesis Hugh Trevor-Roper who established himself as Taylor's leading critic. Trevor-Roper is now probably best known for mistakenly authenticating the supposed "Hitler Diaries" in the 1970s. In 1961 he was best known for having been awarded the Regius professorship of modern history at Oxford, through Namier's recommendation, when many thought the post should have gone to Taylor. The affair of the Regius professorship in 1957 put a bitter end to Taylor's friendship with both men, a few years later Taylor refused a request to visit Namier on his death-bed, an index of the sincerity with which he denied coveting the Regius chair. Trevor-Roper differed with Taylor largely over the extent to which Hitler had planned the war. He based Ms attack largely on Taylor's use of the documents. Sometimes a man may say the truth even in a document called forth by tactical necessity,,, wrote Trevor-Roper, and noted that it is a mistake to assume that a man is lying because it is not tactically necessary for him to tell the truth.(109) He concluded:

In spite of his statements about "historical discipline," he selects,

suppresses and arranges evidence on no principle other than the

needs of his thesis; and that thesis, that Hitler was a traditional

statesman, of limited aims, merely responding to a given

situation, rests on no evidence at all, ignores essential evidence,

and is, in my opinion, demonstrably false.(110)

A variant of criticism based on Taylor's handling of the documents is to rest the argument for Hitler's culpability on the logic of Nazi ideology, on the inseparability of Nazi foreign and domestic policies. Gerhard L. Weinberg has written three bulky volumes - two on German foreign policy in the 1930s and one on the Second World War itself - which at their core consist of a rebuttal of Taylor's position on precisely this question.(111) Weinberg opens his first volume with a chapter entitled "The World Through Hitler's Eyes," in which he criticizes Taylor for attempting "to convert Hitler into an eighteenth-century diplomat, striving for revision of the most recent treaty in the same way Maria Theresa attempted to recover Silesia for Austria from the Prussia of Frederick the Great." Weinberg then develops over the course of his three impressively documented volumes the thesis that the doctrines of racial Darwinism and the need for Lebensraum provided Hitler with the impetus and blueprint for his conduct of foreign policy, and ultimately for his plunge into a global war. Weinberg is prepared to rest on the evidence of speeches and writings, "a not unnatural source in the case of a man who devoted his fall time to political agitation."(112)

This may very well be, but the documentary question is not free from difficulty. Taylor is too tricky to be entirely caught this way. His alternative explanations of the Hossbach memorandum and of Hitler's military directives are ingenious, if not in fact plausible. Arguing over the interpretation of documents is a game that needs a referee; in other words, some source external to the documents. To base one's case, in effect, on the contention "my interpretation of the document proves that your interpretation is wrong", is not completely satisfying. Edward Ingram puts his finger on this point when he writes of Taylor:

How may one fault such an argument? On what does it rest? On

the documentary evidence? ... Of course not. Pull out a brick and

the wall will stand. Pull out all the bricks? The wall still stands.

It is an imaginary wall. It is supported by the spaces between the

evidence ... Evidence of the past is not found in documents, only

in what historians decide that documents mean. Historical truth

is never self-evident.(113)

But Taylor catches himself, once again, in a major contradiction. Like most historians who have studied Hitler's ideas he concludes that the dictator was not at all an original thinker. "The unique quality in Hitler," he says, "was the gift of translating commonplace thoughts into action." Hitler, in fact, was animated by "a terrifying literalism":

Writers had been running down democracy for half a century. It

took Hitler to create a totalitarian dictatorship ... It was the same

with foreign policy. Not many Germans really cared passionately

and persistently whether Germany again dominated Europe. But

they talked as if they did. Hitler took them at their word. He made

the Germans live up to their professions, or down to them

-- much to their regret.(114)

Hitler, says Taylor, followed a consistent pattern with everything he did. He speculated about his goals, without a clear idea of how he would achieve them. Then, somehow, he did.(115) If this is so, are we not entitled to take seriously the records of his speculations? As Norman Rich has argued, Taylor cannot have it both ways.(116) Then there is the very bulk of the documentary evidence. By the end of his book, Taylor's evasions of the apparently clear meaning of every source begin to sound like the desperate manoeuvrings of a defence counsel confronted by a smoking gun and three inculpatory statements. He might be right about Mein Kampf, he might be right about the Hossbach memorandum; perhaps the record of the speech of 23 May 1939 is a fake. But all of it? There are simply too many indications that the terrifyingly literal Hitler foresaw and planned something rather like what happened for Taylor to dismiss them all.

But in any case, it is a very different thing to say that Hitler did not plan or foresee the exact shape of the Second World War than it is to say that his actions did not cause it or that he does not bear the overwhelming share of responsibility for starting it. This is familiar terrain to specialists in German history enmeshed in the debates of functionalists and intentionalists, debates which Taylor's book preceded. In two difference lies the third fundamental objection to the Origins. If Taylor is arguing -- as on balance, I think he is -- that Hitler did not cause the war because he planned something entirely different, or did not plan anything at all, then Taylor's thesis is beside the point; as a lawyer for whom I once worked used to say of her opponents, arguments in court, "it won't take him where he wants to go."

The legal analogy is not out of place. The courts rule every day on questions of causation and responsibility, and the law books are filled with sophisticated analyses of these problems. In the common law cause and intent are very different things. Tortious liability in a wide range of situations may be founded on the negligence of the tortfeaser; in other words, on the very failure of the tortfeaser to foresee what the court deems a "reasonable person" should have foreseen under the circumstances. To secure a conviction the criminal law generally requires that the prosecution prove the coincidence of mens rea and actus reus (essentially, guilty mind and culpable act) in the case of the accused. But various degrees of "recklessness" or "advertent negligence", falling a good deal short of full subjective foresight by the accused, will often satisfy the mens rea requirement.(117) It is not enough, then, to dismiss the causal efficacy of an actor by playing down the degree of premeditation in his or her actions. Paraphrasing typical legal formulas, the court of history could easily conclude that the reasonable person should foresee that general war would result from an invasion of Poland; or that, at best, Hitler launched his attack "reckless whether war ensued.(118) In short, insisting on full premeditation and subjective foresight to convict Hitler of causing the war aims too high, and leaves his causal agency intact.

Taylor's weaknesses on questions of causation are the subject of a 1978 article by the historical philosopher W.H. Dray.(119) Dray diagnoses four or perhaps five notions of the meaning of historical cause implicit both in Taylor's work and that of his critics, chiefly Trevor-Roper. Is an historical cause rooted in the subjective intent of the actor? If so, what does an actor have to have foreseen in order to be deemed a cause of the event? Dray notes that the understanding of cause as subjective intent is common to both Taylor and Trevor-Roper, and gives trouble to both of their arguments. Taylor has to change his ground on exactly what Hitler did or did not foresee to downplay Hitler's efficacy as a causal agent; but in arguing that Hitler caused the war by pursuing a policy with war as its probable outcome, Trevor@ Roper hangs Polish Foreign Minister Jozef Beck and Neville Chamberlain on Hitler's rope.(120)

But perhaps the causal agent is necessarily the abnormal one. If so, the question of establishing a "datum" for normality becomes essential (and inescapably subjective). For Taylor normality (and, apparently, moral validity) is represented by the settlement of Brest Litovsk, whereas for Trevor-Roper it is the settlement of Versailles. Their respective arguments flow inevitably from these rather arbitrary starting points.(121)

Perhaps, Dray continues, Taylor puts forward a theory based on the autonomy of "particular" or surface causes from the "profound." But there is a serious problem here too. If each level of causation cannot explain the war without the other, then we really have two parts of a whole explanation, the one neither autonomous nor generically distinguishable from the other.(122) Interestingly, in his contribution to the Martel volume of essays, Paul Kennedy supplies a practical example of Dray's argument for the integration of causal factors. Kennedy's article is essentially an argument for a more complicated interpretation of appeasement which takes account of all of the various "schools" -- the "guilty men" school, Taylor's presentation of well-intentioned bungling, the constraints put on British policy in the 1930s by economic and military weakness, and the historical continuity of British efforts to mediate continental disputes. The value of Taylor's work, for Kennedy, is that it contributed one of the threads in this larger tapestry.(123)

As Dray suggests, it is highly unlikely that Taylor thought much about theories of causation. Taylor was interested in human stories. Like Shaw, his subject was the spectacle of human folly and blunder, the pricking of moral pretensions and assumptions. Why did Taylor discuss "profound" causes only to dismiss them, and rest his argument on the particular? Imagine trying to make a gripping human drama of economic forces, of trade flows and reparations, or of the politics of cultural pessimism. Statesmen and their foibles make better copy.

Indeed, perhaps the entire question of whether Taylor was right or wrong is beside the point. In his recent book Explaining Auschwitz and Hiroshima: History Writing and the Second World War 1945-1990,(124) the Australian historian R.J.B. Bosworth sets out to give an overview of the historiography of what he calls "the long second world war", the process beginning with the first war and culminating in "Auschwitz" and "Hiroshima" -- also terms of art in his account. Bosworth is as much a Taylor enthusiast as Sisman or Martel, but his answer to the question of Taylor's continuing relevance is both striking and troubling. Bosworth's book is expressly dedicated to the proposition that history is, in Pieter Geyl's phrase, "an argument without end." Quoting Umberto Eco, Bosworth throws in his lot with the postmodernists in stressing what books mean rather than what they say.(125) This is Bosworth's conclusion on the merits of the Origins:

The Origins of the Second World War, in the short term, would

encourage an unfreezing of time in British historiography and

signal the commencement of the Sixties in British society. In the

longer term, the resumption of debate would also permit those

who disliked the People's war to re-work their versions of history

and, especially in the 1980s, come up with new answers, or old

answers in new words.(126)

In other words, the point is not that Taylor might be right, or even wrong. His contribution was to a process, not to results. He got the process of history moving again; he kept the argument from ending. An argument such as Bosworth's may, of course, open the door to a despairing relativism. Why argue, if one doesn't even stand a chance of being right? Should an historian not, in the end, be concerned with producing an accurate account of what happened? Is the importance of an historian's work only in its contribution to the process of historiography, rather than its accurate answers to questions about the past?

I have argued that the central thesis of the Origins is difficult to discover from the text itself; that (in so far as it can be discovered) this thesis is highly suspect in view of the available evidence, and that it rests on a misplaced equation of cause and intent. But I have also argued that the book operates on levels other than the literal, and that Taylor intended it to do so. Here I would like to stake out a position somewhere between Trevor-Roper and Bosworth. We can still read the book with profit -- and the reason rests as much on Taylor's historical method as do his errors. The argument in this essay has dealt with the intellectual origins of the Origins and with Taylor's methods. I have stressed the long roots of the Origins' theses, Taylor's contrary nature, his sense of political engagement, his intuitive and literary approach to historical study, and his avowed amorality. All of these elements played a part in the kind of book Taylor wrote and determine how we should read it.

First, Taylor had been reading, writing, and thinking extensively about the origins of the war for fifteen years by the time his book was published. A long time -- perhaps too long. He knew the sources to the point of boredom. His restless mind was looking for something new to say.

Second, a dedicated controversialist like Taylor could hardly have been unaware the incendiary nature of the book he was writing. We have seen how he often admitted his love of stirring up trouble among the orthodox and complacent; we have seen his reverence for devil's advocacy, and his belief that such argument was necessary to maintain a democratic foreign policy. This love of argument for argument's sake (remember, once again, "if only as an academic exercise") drove not only his conclusions, but his very method. There is hardly a sentence of the Origins that does not seem to reach for an ironic, paradoxical, or shocking conclusion. It was an inevitable corollary of Taylor's method that two love of the shocking conclusion led him to positions for which there was no evidence, like Wile E. Coyote when, intent on the roadrunner, he has run off a cliff and unwittingly treads the air until he falls.

It is also difficult, given Taylor's views on scholarly political engagement, to see his book separately from his C.N.D. activities (just as it is hard to see his book on Germany's colonies separately from the question of appeasement). Taylor had written in 1959 that he expected to see a nuclear war by 1965, and in a characteristic example of his willingness to draw historical lessons when it suited him, he argued that major wars start when states feel themselves in decline and threatened by a hostile coalition.(127) The lesson of the Origins was that a major war could start by accident -- by statesmen's blunders. This was quite bad enough in 1939. It would have been unthinkable in 1961. Taylor seemed to admit this purpose when he wrote in the Origins itself that: "I doubt whether much will be gained by waiting another ten or fifteen years [to write the book]; and much might be lost. The few survivors of civilisation may have given up reading books by then, let alone writing them."(128)

The lesson need not have been, as Trevor-Roper thought it was, that the Soviet Union should be appeased. But the book does appear to be an explicit warning against the dangers of accidental war, and by extension, an argument in favour of nuclear disarmament.

Taylor was clearly not troubled by the relative scarcity of primary sources on his subject. As we have seen, he hardly seemed to like what documentation was available to him. He had a high opinion of his own powers of intuition, his "green fingers." For Taylor, intuition was a more important historical resource than documentation. He was unafraid of substituting his own intuition for the common sense of the postwar west. And if he was wrong -- well, even error could be fruitful. And so he told his story, like a novelist, more an artist than a scholar.

Then there is Taylor's rather submerged morality. His expressed denial of a moral perspective on the Second World War merits another notation of "goak here." I would venture to say that nihilists do not believe that their actions can change the world for the better: they do not campaign publicly for political causes, for resistance to Hitler or for nuclear disarmament. They do not write books that can be read as moral condemnations of an entire nation or as a plea for responsible statesmanship in the nuclear era. Taylor's concerns were intensely moral. Why did he condemm the statesmen of the 1930s? He obligingly tells us in the Origins: "The purpose of political activity is to provide peace and prosperity; and in this every statesman failed, for whatever reason."(129)

Such, then, is Taylor's book: brilliant and maddening and perverse, an academic exercise, a bit of devil's advocacy, a "goak." But not entirely a joke. When he wrote the Origins Taylor was a great scholar at the height of his powers, blessed with an enviable linguistic competence and a great command of the source materials of modern diplomatic history. He was capable of writing with terrific energy and wit, and with a conspicuous ability to compress a great deal of information into a coherent and highly readable narrative line. I am not at all convinced that in his heart Taylor believed in the literal truth of every word he wrote; there are hints enough, both within the Origins and in other sources, of Taylor's willingness to treat the writing of history as something of an intellectual game. Like the subjects of his "favourite brainchild", Taylor was a trouble maker. He was virtually incapable of writing a line that did not seek to shock or offend. But this is not to say that Taylor's work was without serious intent. His belief in the need for dissent and devil's advocacy in questions of foreign policy meshed neatly with his own perverse temperament. His passionate commitment to disarmament and his fear of war by blunder in the nuclear age provided sound enough reasons to sharpen the general public appreciation of the role of contingency in diplomacy. If Hitler's war, seemingly the least accidental in history, could be portrayed as something very different, perhaps the graffiti on the western face of the Berlin Wall could be redrawn as well.

Thus I would argue that Taylor's book can and should be read as something of an admonitory fable. But the point of the "argument without end" is surely to provide, within the limits of human fallibility, the most accurate answers to what are often urgent questions. Few historians would be so vain as to suppose that they were capable of authoring a complete and definitive account of an historical episode. An intelligent and vigorous debate is no doubt the surest means we mortal humans possess of arriving at satisfactory answers. But arriving at answers is still the goal, getting there may be half the fun but it is not half the point. Sometimes the argument does end, or at least diminishes. There are many examples of historiographical controversies which have, in time, resulted in a rough consensus. An approach like Bosworth's, which invests all significance in the process, can entirely undercut the purpose of inquiring about the past. So we may still read Taylor with pleasure, with profit, with admiration, and perhaps with indignation; but in the end we should not lose sight of the fact that his enormous contributions to the process of historiography do not entirely negate the fact that he was, in some important respects, wrong.

John Stuart Mill wrote in On Liberty:

If there are any persons who contest a received opinion, or who

will do so if law or opinion will let them, let us thank them for it,

open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that there is

someone to do for us what we otherwise ought, if we have any

regard for either the certainty or the vitality of our convictions,

to do with much greater labour for ourselves.(130)

While whole-heartedly welcoming argument, Mill never lost sight of the principle that the point of argument is truth. I suspect that Taylor, a man who dedicated his professional life to tilting at received opinions, would agree; and as we read Taylor so, I think, should we.

(1) This paper was originally written for a seminar on appeasement with Professor Wesley Wark at the University of Toronto. I would like to thank Professor Wark for suggesting that I write about Taylor, and for his tremendous help and encouragement with the project. I would also like to thank the three anonymous readers of this paper for their extremely helpful criticisms. Of course, all opinions and errors remain my own. I would like to dedicate this paper to my fiance and favourite proofreader, Corinna Andiel.

(2) The Origins of the Second World War (Harmondsworth, 1984), p. 7.

(3) A.J.P. Taylor, Letters to Eva 1969-83 (London, 1991), p. 233.

(4) See Wm. Roger Louis (ed.), The Origins of the Second World War: A.J.P. Taylor and his Critics (New York, 1972); Esmonde M. Robertson (ed.), The Origins of the Second World War (London, 1971); and Gordon Martel (ed.), The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered: The A.J.P. Taylor Debate After Twenty-Five Years (Boston, 1986). Taylor also was honoured with no less than Martin Gilbert (ed.), A Century of Conflict 1850-1950 (London, Alan Sked and Chris Cook (eds.), Crisis and Controversy: Essays in Honour of A.J.P. Taylor (London, 1976); and Chris Wrigley (ed.), Warfare, Diplomacy and Politics: Essays in Honour of A.J.P. Taylor (London, 1986).

(5) A.J.P. Taylor, A Personal History (London, 1983), p. 235.

(6) Taylor, Origins, pp. 266-67.

(7) Adam Sisman, A.J.P. Taylor: A Biography (London, 1994), p. 94.

(8) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 113.

(9) (Manchester, 1934).

(10) (London, 1941); new edition published as The Habsburg Monarchy 1809-1918 (London, 1948).

(11) (London, 1962).

(12) (Oxford, 1954).

(13) (London, 1957).

(14) (Oxford, 1965).

(15) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 99.

(16) Taylor, Origins, p. 42

(17) Taylor, Origins, pp. 335-36.

(18) Taylor, Origins, p. 40.

(19) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 134.

(20) See Paul Kennedy, "Appeasement," in Martel, p. 147.

(21) Manchester Guardian Weekly, 7 Oct. 1938, p. 281.

(22) (London, 1938), p 14.

(23) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 123.

(24) Sisman, pp. 118-19.

(25) Taylor, The Course of German History, p. 7.

(26) Taylor, Origins, p. 27.

(27) From Napoleon to Stalin (London, 1950); Rumours of Wars (London, 1952); Englishmen and Others (London, 1956.)

(28) Quoted in Sisman, p. 182.

(29) New Statesman and Nation, 2 Oct. 1948.

(30) Ibid.

(31) Manchester Guardian Weekly, 2 Oct. 1958, p. 7.

(32) Taylor, From Napoleon to Stalin, p. 163.

(33) Ibid., p. 155.

(34) New Statesman and Nation, 15 Oct 1949, p. 428.

(35) Taylor, Rumours of Wars, p. 203.

(36) "Appeasement: German Version," New Statesman and Nation, 17 Dec. 1949, p. 730.

(37) Taylor, Rumours of War, p. 216.

(38) Ibid., p. 256.

(39) "Germany," Manchester Guardian Weekly, 6 July 1950, p. 12.

(40) "France, Germany and the Soviet Union," Manchester Guardian Weekly, 11 Jan. 1951, p. 11.

(41) New Statesman and Nation, 9 June 1956, p. 661.

(42) New Statesman and Nation, 1 Oct. 1955 p. 407.

(43) Taylor, Origins, p. 26.

(44) "A Devil's Advocate," Manchester Guardian Weekly, 30 Oct. 1952, p. 11.

(45) Manchester Guardian Weekly, 2 Oct. 1958, p. 7.

(46) Taylor, "Accident Prone, or What Happened Next." in Taylor, From Napoleon to the Second International: Essays on Nineteenth Century Europe, edited with an introduction by Chris Wrigly (Harmondsworth 1993), p. 16.

(47) Taylor, A Personal History. p. 229.

(48) Taylor, "Accident Prone." p. 21.

(49) Quoted in Ved Mehta Fly and the Fly Bottle: Encounters with British Intellectuals (Boston, 1964), p. 182

(50) Quoted in Louis, p. 26.

(51) Mehta, p. 168.

(52) Taylor, Letters to Eva 1969-83, p. 11.

(53) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 8.

(54) Ibid., p. 2.

(55) Quoted in Louis, p. 14.

(56) Taylor, Origins, p. 26.

(57) Quoted in Louis, p. 2.

(58) Sisman, p. 136.

(59) Taylor, Letters to Eva 1969-1983, p. 248.

(60) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 113.

(61) Ibid., p. 59.

(62) Ibid., p. 59.

(63) Taylor, The Trouble Makers, p. 125.

(64) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 27.

(65) In George Bernard Shaw, What I Really Wrote About the War (London, 1931), p. 22.

(66) Ibid, pp. 32-33.

(67) Ibid, p. 40.

(68) Ibid, p. 35.

(69) Taylor, The Trouble Makers, p. 125.

(70) Ibid., p. 124.

(71) Ibid., p. 236.

(72) Quoted in Louis, p. 26.

(73) Mehta, p. 151.

(74) Taylor, "Accident Prone," p. 3.

(75) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 205.

(76) Taylor, Origins, p. 40.

(77) Taylor, Letters to Eva 1969-1983, p. 52.

(78) Mehta, p. 182.

(79) Taylor, A Personal History pp. 14-15.

(80) Taylor, Origins, p. 7.

(81) Mehta, p. 171.

(82) Reprinted in Louis, pp. 58-61.

(83) TLS, 9 June 1961, p. 390.

(84) Taylor, Letters to Eva 1969-1983, p. 24.

(85) Ibid., p. 93.

(86) Taylor, A Personal History, p. 233.

(87) Ibid., p. 257.

(88) Sisman p. 293.

(89) Robert Cole, A.J.P. Taylor: The Traitor Within the Gates (London, 1993), p. 203.

(90) Gordon Martel, "Introduction: The Revisionist as Moralist - A.J.P. Taylor and the Lessons of [European History](https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=00084107&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE|A18672225&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=abs&userGroupName=nm_p_oweb&isGeoAuthType=true# "Related articles for'European history'")," in Martel, p. 13.

(91) Contemporary Review, April 1994, pp. 178-82.

(92) Ibid., p. 182. Rowse, like Namier and even Trevor-Roper, was a former friend of Taylor's. According to Sisman, they fell out in 1953 when Taylor wrote an unfavourable review of a book translated from French and edited by Rowse; Rowse was incensed. (See Sisman, p. 217).

(93) Taylor, Origins, p. 26.

(94) Ibid., p. 42.

(95) Ibid., p. 71.

(96) Ibid., p. 134.

(97) Ibid, pp. 172-75.

(98) Ibid, p. 189.

(99) Ibid., p. 250

(100) Ibid., p. 322.

(101) Ibid, p. 336.

(102) A very convenient summary collection of documents is Anthony P. Adamthwaite, The Making of the Second World War (London, 1977).

(103) For the text see Adamthwaite, pp. 167-72.

(104) Taylor, Origins, pp. 20-21.

(105) Ibid., p. 170.

(106) Ibid., p. 304.

(107) Ibid, p. 301; the document has been taken seriously by most other scholars, and may be seen in Adamthwaite, pp. 214-15.

(108) Ibid., p. 13.

(109) Ibid., p. 52.

(110) Ibid., p. 57.

(111) Gerhard L. Weinberg. The Foreign Policy of Nazi Germany, vol. 1. Diplomatic Revolution in Europe 1933-1936 (Chicago, 1971) and vol. 2, Starting World War II, 1937-1939 (Chicago, 1980); A World at Arms: A Global

(112) Weinberg, Diplomatic Revolution in Europe, pp. 1-2. In a predictably critical review of Weinberg's first volume Taylor refers dismissively to the ideological question as "Hitler's world picture -- race, living space and the rest." Journal of Modern History, vol. 44, no. 1, March 1972, pp. 140-43.

(113) "A Patriot For Me," in Martel, p. 250.

(114) Taylor, Origins, pp. 99-100.

(115) Ibid., pp. 10-12.

(116) Norman Rich, "Hitler's Foreign Policy," in Martel, p. 106.

(117) On the Tortious principles see John G. Fleming, The Law of Torts: 8th Edition (Agincourt, Ontario, 1992), especially pp. 192-224; on the question of criminal intent, see Alan W. Mewett and Morris Manning. Criminal Law: 2nd Edition (Toronto, 1985), especially pp. 103-43.

(118) See, for example, the definition of murder in the Canadian Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C.-46, s. 229.

(119) W.H. Dray, "Concepts of Causation in A.J. P. Taylor's Account of the Origins of the Second World War," History and Theory, vol. 27:2, 1978, pp. 140-74.

(120) Ibid., pp. 154-59.

(121) Ibid., pp. 161-63.

(122) Ibid., p. 173.

(123) Paul Kennedy, "Appeasement," in Martel, pp. 140-61.

(124) (London and New York, 1993).

(125) Ibid., p. xii.

(126) Ibid., p. 34.

(127) "How Near is World War Three?' Manchester Guardian Weekly, 3 September 1959, p. 5.

(128) Taylor, Origins, p 40.

(129) Taylor, Origins, p. 40.

(130) John Stuart Mill Utilitarianism, On Liberty, and Considerations on Representative Government (London, 1984), p. 113.
