# The United States Replies

The Wayback Machine - http://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html

[Appendix D. Review of the diplomatic conversations between the United States and Japan, and related matters, from the Atlantic Conference in August 1941 through December 8, 1941 .............. 291](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#291)[Introductory statement ........................................ 291](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#291a)[Brief resume of the Japanese-American conversations prior to the Atlantic Conference ..................................... 293](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#293)[The Atlantic Conference (August 10-14, 1941) .................. 300](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#300)[President Roosevelt warns Japan against further aggression and at the same time offers to resume the Japanese-American conversations (August 17, 1941) ............................. 302](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#302)[Japan protests United States shipments of oil to Russia (August 27, 1941) ........................................... 305](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#305)[Premier Konoye sends a personal message to President Roosevelt urging the proposed "Leaders Conference" (August 28, 1941) .... 306](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#306) 
IX                          C O N T E N T S 
Appendix D-Continued                                               Page 
[Germany suspects treachery (August 29-30, 1941) ................. 307](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#307)[President Roosevelt replies to Premier Konoye's message (September 3, 1941) ........................................... 310](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#310)[Japan presents new proposals in a new form (September 6, 1941) .. 311](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#311)[Ambassador Grew supports the proposed "Leaders Conference" (August-September, 1941) ....................................... 314](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#314)[Japan determines its minimum demands and its maximum concessions in the negotiations with the United States (September 6, 1941) ........................................... 316](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#316)[The United States asks Japan to clarify its new proposals (October 2, 1941) ............................................. 319](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#319)[Germany demands that Japan warn the United States that war between Germany and Italy and the United States would lead to war between Japan and the United States pursuant to the Tripartite Pact (October 1941) ................................ 325](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#325)[The Konoye Cabinet falls, and Ambassador Nomura asks permission to return to Japan (October 16, 1941; October 18-November 5, 1941) ......................................................... 326](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#326)[The Tojo Cabinet formulates its "Absolutely final proposal" (November 5, 1941) ............................................ 331](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#331)[Ambassador Grew warns that war with Japan may come with "Dramatic and dangerous suddenness" (November 3, 1941) ........ 335](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#335)[Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek appeals to Great Britain and the United States for aid (October 28-November 4, 1941) ........... 337](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#337)[Japan delivers its next-to-last proposal to the United States (November 10, 1941) ........................................... 344](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#344)[The Tojo Cabinet refuses to consider any suggestion less favorable to Japan than its" Absolutely final proposal" (November 18-19, 1941) ........................................ 355](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#355)[Japan delivers its "Absolutely final proposal" to the United States and demands an agreement on that basis (November 20, 1941) ........................................... 360](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#360)[The United States replies (November 26, 1941) ................... 363](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#363)[The Tojo Cabinet makes a pretense of continuing the Japanese- American conversations and at the same time moves additional Japanese troops into southern Indochina (November 27-December 7, 1941) ................................ 387](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#387)[The invasion of Thailand by Japanese forces from French Indochina appears imminent (December 1-7, 1941) ......................... 405](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#405)[Germany tells Japan the time is ripe to strike at the United States, and promises to join with Japan in war against the United States (November 29, 1941) ............................. 409](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#409)[President Roosevelt returns to Washington as the far eastern situation moves rapidly toward a climax (December 1, 1941) .... 411](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#411)[President Roosevelt asks the Japanese Government to explain its purpose in moving additional troops into southern Indochina (December 2, 1941) ............................................. 415](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#415)[The Japanese Government claims its troop movements in French Indochina are for the purpose of defense against an attack by the Chinese (December 5, 1941) ................................ 421](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#421)[The last hours (December 6-8, 1941) ............................. 424](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html#424)

Page 291

[**Appendix D**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)
**REVIEW OF THE DIPLOMATIC CONVERSATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND JAPAN, AND RELATED MATTERS, FROM THE ATLANTIC CONFERENCE IN AUGUST, 1941 THROUGH DECEMBER 8,1941**
[**INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

This appendix reviews, upon the basis of the record before the Committee 
and in greater detail than in Part I of the report to which it is 
annexed, the diplomatic conversations between the United States and 
Japan, and related matters, from the Atlantic Conference in August 1941 
through December 8, 1941. While it is not to be regarded as including 
all of the material contained in the record before the Committee that 
touches upon those conversations during that period, it does attempt to 
set forth the material facts in connection therewith.

Prior to the Committee's investigation, nearly all of the information 
concerning the diplomatic conversations during 1941 between the United 
States and Japan that had been made public was contained in the official 
State Department publications, "Peace and War" (ex. 28) [1] and "Foreign 
Relations of the United States, Japan, 1931-1941" (ex. 29), together 
with former Ambassador Joseph C. Grew's book, "Ten Years in Japan" (ex. 
30), which were published during the war and were subject to wartime 
restrictions. To the basic material contained in those publications, the 
Committee has added hundreds of documents, personal as well as official, 
from the files of the State Department and of the late President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt. In addition, the Committee has received in 
evidence hundreds of messages between the Japanese Foreign Office in 
Tokyo and the Japanese Ambassadors in Washington as intercepted, 
translated, and available at the time to high official; in the United 
States Government in Washington, including President Roosevelt and 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull. There 1S also before the Committee 
testimony of former Secretary of State Hull and of former United States 
Ambassador in Japan Joseph. C. Grew, a prepared statement and answers to 
interrogatories submitted by former Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, 
and collateral (regarding diplomatic matters) testimony of Gen. George 
C. Marshall, Admiral Harold R. Stark, and other high-ranking officers of 
the Army and Navy. The record before the Committee also contains 
hundreds of captured Japanese documents, as well as reports of 
interrogations conducted in Japan for the supreme allied commander, Gen. 
Douglas MacArthur, at the request of the Committee, many of which are 
directly concerned with the diplomatic events immediately preceding 
Pearl Harbor, including an authoritative translation of the memoirs of 
Prince Fumimaro Konoye, Premier of Japan until October

[1] All references in this appendix indicated in this manner are to 
exhibits introduced at the hearings before the Committee.

Page 292             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

16, 1941. This mass of testimony and documentary evidence, from so many 
different and independent sources, and including official documents of 
the Japanese and other governments, as well as of the United States 
Government, affords countless opportunities for verification by cross-
checking

By interweaving the diplomatic material contained in the documentary 
evidence and testimony before the Committee, this appendix attempts to 
reconstruct chronologically the significant events in the diplomatic 
conversations between the United States and Japan during the 4 months 
that immediately preceded the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Only 
thus, for example, can the intercepted Japanese diplomatic messages 
between Tokyo and Washington be examined in the surrounding 
circumstances in which they were first seen by high officials in the 
United States Government, for those messages were the day-to-day 
instructions sent by the Japanese Foreign Office in Tokyo to the 
Japanese Ambassadors in Washington for the purpose of guiding them in 
their conversations with Secretary Hull and President Roosevelt, and the 
Ambassadors' reports and comments to the Japanese Foreign Office 
concerning those conversations. While in American hands the diplomatic 
messages between Tokyo and Washington not only provided Secretary Hull 
and President Roosevelt with advance knowledge of the Japanese plans for 
the conduct of the conversations but also were one of the most important 
and significant types of intelligence information available to the Army 
and Navy in Washington, they did not contain any information pointing 
toward Pearl Harbor as a possible target of Japanese attack.

Since the report to which this appendix is annexed discusses in detail 
the military aspects and implications of the diplomatic conversations 
between the United States and Japan and of the intercepted Japanese 
diplomatic messages between Tokyo and Washington, no attempt is made 
here to tie in the events on the "diplomatic front" with the various 
warning messages sent by the Army and Navy from Washington to the 
commanders in the Pacific, although the latter messages were to a 
considerable extent based upon the state of Japanese-American diplomatic 
relations at the time they were dispatched. Neither does this appendix 
attempt to describe the process of building up American military 
strength in the Pacific area which was underway during the period in 
question, although by taking up the Marshall-Stark joint memoranda of 
November 5 and November 27 in connection with the events that gave rise 
to each, it does indicate in general terms the over-all military and 
naval considerations that affected American policies in the Pacific 
during the latter part of 1941. Parenthetically, it may be noted here 
that the inherent relationship between diplomatic policies and military 
and naval power was succinctly stated by Secretary Hull when he 
testified before the Committee that soon after he came to the State 
Department he learned that the representatives of the aggressor nations 
with whom he talked "were looking over my shoulder at our Navy and our 
Army," and that the diplomatic strength of the United States went up or 
down with their estimate of what the United States Army and Navy 
"amounted to." 

The record before the Committee shows that the United States Government 
participated in the conversations with Japan in an effort to dissuade 
the Japanese Government from its course of military aggression and its 
Axis ties with Germany and Italy. The fact that

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 293

the United States was engaging in such conversations with Japan was 
believed to strengthen the position of the elements in that country who 
disapproved of the policies of those who dominated the Japanese 
Government; success in negotiations with Japan on the basis of the 
principles to which the United States Government adhered would have had 
many material and other advantages for both the United States and Japan. 
American participation in the conversations had the further purpose of 
giving the United States Army and Navy more time to prepare their 
defense of areas in the Pacific regarded as vital to the safety and 
security of the United States. Recognition of this dual purpose is the 
key to an understanding of the day-to-day course of the conversations. 
Every action taken, every move made, on the American side must be 
considered in the light of those objectives.

[**BRIEF RESUME OF THE JAPANESE-AMERICAN CONVERSATIONS PRIOR TO THE ATLANTIC CONFERENCE**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

This narrative begins in August, 1941 with the President of the United 
States and the Prime Minister of Great Britain, in conference on a 
warship off the coast of Newfoundland, discussing how to prevent the 
outbreak of war with Japan. It ends on December 7-8, 1941 with Japanese 
bombs falling on ships of the United States Pacific Fleet in Pearl 
Harbor, with Japanese troops invading Thailand and British Malaya, and 
with other Japanese attacks on Singapore, Hong Kong, the Philippine 
Islands, Guam, Wake, and Midway. 

Into the intervening 4 months were crowded events the causes of which 
lay deeper and were more fundamental than the Japanese occupation of 
southern French Indochina in July or the breaking off of the Japanese-
American conversations and the freezing of Japanese assets in the United 
States which had immediately followed that Japanese move. By August 
1941, there was but a slim chance that the Japanese Government would 
"reverse the engine," as Ambassador Grew expressed it, and abandon the 
course of aggression through force of arms to which it had been 
committed. Although it was true that the informal conversations in 
Washington between the new Japanese Ambassador, Admiral Kichisaburo 
Nomura, had revealed an apparent willingness on the part of the Japanese 
Government to go along with certain of the peaceful principles to which 
the United States was committed, *provided those principles were stated 
in sufficiently general terms to make their application in specific 
situations wholly unpredictable*, those conversations had disclosed 
three crucial points of difference between the two Governments: the 
question of nondiscrimination in international trade, the question of 
the withdrawal of Japanese troops from China, and the question of 
Japan's obligations under the Tripartite Pact.

During the latter part of January 1941, through private Japanese and 
American citizens, the suggestion had reached President Roosevelt and 
Secretary Hull that the Japanese Government would welcome an opportunity 
to alter its political alignments and modify its attitude toward the 
"China Incident" (ex. 29, vol. II, PP. 328-329; ex. 179).  The initial 
reaction of the United States Government had been one of caution (ex. 
29, vol. II, P. 330).  Secretary Hull testified that -

"In the light of Japan's past and current record and in view of the wide 
divergences between the policies which the United States and Japan had 
been pursuing

[Pairs of asterisks have been used to replace italics in the original 
text.  LWJ]

Page 294             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

in the Far East, I estimated from the outset that there was not 1 chance 
in 20 or 1 in 50 or even 1 in 100 of reaching a peaceful settlement.  
Existing treaties relating to the Far East were adequate, provided the 
signatory governments lived up to them. We were, therefore, not calling 
for new agreements. But if there was a chance that new agreements would 
contribute to peace in the Pacific, the President and I believed that we 
should not neglect that possibility, slim as it was.

"We had in mind doing everything we could to bring about a peaceful, 
fair and stabilizing settlement of the situation throughout the Pacific 
area. Such a course was in accordance with the traditional attitudes and 
beliefs of the American people.  Moreover, the President and I 
constantly had very much in mind the advice of our highest military 
authorities who kept emphasizing to us the imperative need of having 
time to build up preparations for defense vital not only to the United 
States but to many other countries resisting aggression. Our decision to 
enter into the conversations with the Japanese was, therefore, in line 
with our need to rearm for self-defense.

"The President and I fully realized that the Japanese government could 
not, even if it wished, bring about an abrupt transformation in Japan's 
course of aggression.  We realized that so much was involved in a 
reconstruction of Japan's position that implementation to any 
substantial extent by Japan of promises to adopt peaceful courses would 
require a long time. We were, therefore, prepared to be patient in an 
endeavor to persuade Japan to turn from her course of aggression. We 
carried no chip on our shoulder, but we were determined to stand by a 
basic position, built on fundamental principles which we applied not 
only to Japan but to all countries (tr. 1101-11025)." [1]

In his early conversations with Ambassador Nomura, who reached 
Washington in February 1941, Secretary Hull had expressed the hope that 
the Japanese Government might have something definite in mind that would 
offer a practical approach to a general settlement of the problems in 
the Pacific, and had indicated the willingness of the United States 
Government to consider any proposal which the Japanese Government might 
offer that was consistent with the principles to which, the Secretary 
had made it clear, the United States was committed (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 
331-332).  Secretary Hull testified as follows regarding his meeting on 
April 16, 1941, with Ambassador Nomura:

"On April 16, I had a further conversation with the Japanese Ambassador. 
I pointed out that *the one paramount preliminary question about which 
our Government was concerned was a definite assurance in advance that 
the Japanese Government had the willingness and power to abandon its 
present doctrine of conquest by force and to adopt four principles which 
our Government regarded as the foundation upon which relations between 
nations should rest*, as follows:

(1) Respect for the territorial integrity and the sovereignty of each 
    and all nations;
(2) Support of the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs 
    of other countries;
(3) Support of the principle of equality, including equality of 
    commercial opportunity;
(4) Nondisturbance of the status quo in the Pacific except as the status 
    quo may be altered by peaceful means.

"I told the Japanese Ambassador that our Government was willing to 
consider any proposal which the Japanese Government might offer such as 
could be consistent with those principles (tr. 11041104)."

As the result of these early conversations, on May 12 (Washington time), 
the Japanese Ambassador had presented to Secretary Hull, upon 
instructions from his Government, a document (Annex A attached hereto) 
containing a proposal for a general settlement between the United States 
and Japan (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 418-425). This document had revealed 
authoritatively for the first time what the Japanese Government had in 
mind as the basis for an agreement 

[1] All references in this appendix indicated in this manner are to 
pages of the transcript of the hearings before the Committee.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           Page 295

between the United States and Japan (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 332). Between 
May 12 and June 21, there had taken place a number of conferences 
between Secretary Hull and the Japanese Ambassador at which the Japanese 
proposal and related matters were discussed.  In the meantime a 
counterproposal by the United States had been prepared, and on June 21 
(Washington time) this counterproposal (Annex B attached hereto) had 
been handed to the Japanese Ambassador (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 483-492).

On June 22, 1941, Germany had invaded Russia. The German attack upon 
Russia had precipitated a series of events in Japan which were to have 
far-reaching effects upon Japanese-American relations.  It had quickened 
the appetites of those in the Japanese Government who believed that 
then, or never, Japan's destiny was in her own hands. Intensive 
consideration had immediately been given in Tokyo to the question 
whether Japan should not attack Russia at once (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, 
p. 16). Foreign Minister Matsuoka in particular had urged this course. 
According to the memoirs of Prince Fumimaro Konoye, the Japanese Premier 
at the time, the attention of the Government became so centered upon 
this question that the American counterproposal of June 21, which by 
that time had been received in Tokyo from the Japanese Ambassador in 
Washington, became completely side-tracked until after an Imperial 
Conference with Emperor Hirohito on July 2 (Japan time) (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, pp. 16, 18). At that conference the question of war with Russia 
had been temporarily shelved in favor of "an advance into the southern 
regions," and it had been decided that, first of all, the plans "which 
have been laid with reference to French Indo-China and Thai will be 
prosecuted, with a view to consolidating our position in the southern 
territories" (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 70; cf. Ex. 1, pp. 1-2.) It is 
now known that at the Imperial Conference on July 2 (Japan time) it was 
also decided that, in case the diplomatic negotiations with the United 
States should break down, "preparations for a war with England and 
America will also be carried forward"; that all plans, including the 
plan to use Japan's military strength to settle the Soviet question if 
the German-Russian war should develop to Japan's advantage, were to be 
carried out-

"in such a way as to place no serious obstacles in the path of our basic 
military preparations for a war with England and America;"

and that-

"In case all diplomatic means fail to prevent the entrance of America 
into the European War, we will proceed in harmony with our obligations 
under the Tri-Partite Pact. However, with reference to the time and 
method of employing our armed forces we will take independent action 
(ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, P. 71)."

The following report of the Imperial Conference on July 2 (Japan time) 
had been cabled by the Japanese Foreign Minister to the Japanese 
Ambassadors in the United States, Germany, Italy, and Russia, the same 
day:

"(National Secret)

"At the conference held in the presence of the Emperor on July 2nd 'The 
Principal Points in the Imperial Policy for Coping with the Changing 
Situation' were decided. This Policy consists of the following two 
parts. The first part 'The Policy' and the second part 'The Principal 
Points.' (I am wiring merely the gist of the matter.) Inasmuch as this 
has to do with national defense secrets, keep 

Page 296             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

the information only to yourself. Please also transmit the content to 
both the Naval and Military Attaches, together with this precaution.

The Policy.

1. Imperial Japan shall adhere to the policy of contributing to world 
peace by establishing the Great East Asia Sphere of Co-prosperity, 
regardless of how the world situation may change.
2. The Imperial Government shall continue its endeavor to dispose of the 
China incident, *and shall take measures with a view to advancing 
southward* in order to establish firmly a basis for her self-existence 
and self-protection.

The Principal Points.

For the purpose of bringing the CHIANG Regime to submission, *increasing 
pressure shall be added from various points in the south*, and by means 
of both propaganda and fighting plans for the taking over of concessions 
shall be carried out. Diplomatic negotiations shall be continued, and 
various other plans shall be speeded with regard to the vital points in 
the south. *Concomitantly, preparations for southward advance shall be 
reinforced and the policy already decided upon with reference to French 
Indo-China and Thailand shall be executed*. As regards the Russo-German 
war, although the spirit of the Three-Power Axis shall be maintained, 
every preparation shall be made at the present and the situation shall 
be dealt with in our own way. In the meantime, diplomatic negotiations 
shall be carried on with extreme care. Although every means available 
shall be resorted to in order to prevent the United States from joining 
the war, if need be, *Japan shall act in accordance with the Three-Power 
Pact and shall decide when and how force will be employed* (ex. 1, pp. 
1-2)." [1]

It is worthy of note that this intercepted Japanese message, which was 
translated and available in Washington [2] on July 8 (Washington time), 
did not mention the decisions at the Imperial Conference respecting the 
United States.

Commencing immediately after the Imperial Conference, Japan had 
proceeded with military preparations on a vast scale, calling up from 1 
to 2 million reservists and conscripts, recalling Japanese merchant 
vessels operating in the Atlantic Ocean, imposing restrictions upon 
travel in Japan, and carrying out strict censorship of mail and 
communications. The Japanese press had dwelt constantly on the theme 
that Japan was being faced with pressure directed against it never 
equaled in all Japanese history. The United States had been charged with 
using the Philippine Islands as a "pistol aimed at Japan's heart." The 
Japanese press had warned that if the United States took further action 
in the direction of encircling Japan, Japanese-American relations would 
face a final crisis (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 339-340).

Largely as a result of disagreements within the Japanese Government 
regarding the reply to be made to the American proposals of June 21, 
Premier Konoye and his entire Cabinet had resigned *en bloc* on July 16 
(Japan time) (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, pp. 20-24). Prince Konoye had 
then been ordered by Emperor Hirohito to organize the new Cabinet, which 
he had done, the only important change being the appointment of Admiral 
Toyoda as Foreign Minister, in place of Yosuke Matsuoka (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, p. 25). The views of the latter had been one of the principal 
causes of the disagreements within the Government regarding its reply to 
the

[1] Unless otherwise noted, all italics in this appendix have been 
supplied.
[2] The expression "translated and available in Washington," as used in 
this appendix, means that English translations of the particular 
intercepted Japanese diplomatic messages were available at the time 
stated to those officials of the United States Government in Washington 
to whom the Army and Navy were distributing "Magic" at the time. It 
should be borne in mind that all such messages to which reference is 
made in this appendix were so available: specific reference has been 
made to the date when a message became available only in those instances 
where knowledge of the exact date is important.

While the information contained in the intercepted Japanese diplomatic 
messages was available at the time, the information contained herein 
which is derived solely from captured Japanese documents (exhibits 8 and 
132) and from the memoirs of Prince Konoye (exhibit 173) was not, of 
course, available at the time.

American proposals of June 21. Following this Cabinet change while 
Premier Konoye and the new Foreign Minister in Tokyo and Ambassador 
Nomura in Washington had made emphatic and repeated protestations of 
Japan's desire for peace and an equitable settlement of Pacific 
problems, the messages from Tokyo to Washington had contained such 
statements as "there is more reason than ever before to arm ourselves to 
the teeth for all-out war" (ex. 1, p. 8). The bombing of American 
property in China had continued, including bursts which damaged the 
American Embassy and the U. S. S. TUTUILA at Chungking (ex. 29, vol. II, 
p. 343). An intercepted message of July 19 (Japan time) from Tokyo to 
Berlin had contained the following estimate of the change in the 
Japanese Cabinet:

"The Cabinet shake-up was necessary to expedite matters in connection 
with National Affairs and has no further significance. Japan's foreign 
policy will not be changed and she will remain faithful to the 
principles of the Tripartite Pact (ex. 1, p. 3)."

In the meantime, the movement of Japanese troops and ships in accordance 
with the Japanese plans for the "southward advance" had begun in 
earnest, (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 340; ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 26). 
Those military and naval movements, plus the failure as yet of the 
Japanese Government to make any reply to the American proposals of June 
21, had led Under Secretary Welles, upon instructions from the Secretary 
of State, to inform Ambassador Nomura on July 23 (Washington time) that 
Secretary Hull "could not see that there was any basis now offered for 
the pursuit of the conversations in which he and the Ambassador had been 
engaged" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 525). About this time, Colonel Hideo 
Iwakuro and Mr. Tadao Wikawa, who had been advising Ambassador Nomura in 
the conversations, left Washington and returned to Japan. On July 24 
(Washington time), in a conference with the Japanese Ambassador attended 
by Under Secretary Welles and Admiral Harold R. Stark, Chief of Naval 
Operations, President Roosevelt had proposed that, if the Japanese 
Government would withdraw its forces from French Indochina, he would 
endeavor to obtain from the British, the Chinese, and the Netherlands 
Governments, and the United States Government itself would give, a 
solemn and binding declaration to regard French Indochina as a 
neutralized country, provided the Japanese Government would give a 
similar commitment (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 527-530). Nevertheless, the 
Japanese troop movements into French Indochina had continued, and on 
July 26 (Washington time) President Roosevelt had issued an Executive 
order freezing all Japanese assets in the United States (ex. 29, vol. 
II, p. 267). The effect of this order had been to bring about very soon 
the virtual cessation of trade between the United States and Japan (ex. 
29, vol. II, p. 343).

In a message dated July 31 (Japan time), which was translated and 
available in Washington on August 4 (Washington time), the new Foreign 
Minister had advised Ambassador Nomura that since the Imperial 
Conference on July 2 (Japan time) the Japanese Government had been 
devoting every effort to bring about the materialization of the policies 
there decided upon. He told the Ambassador:

"Commercial and economic relations between Japan and third countries, 
led by England and the United States, are gradually becoming so horribly 
strained that we cannot endure it much longer. Consequently, our Empire, 
to save its very life, must take measures to secure the raw materials of 
the South Seas. Our Empire

Page 298             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

must immediately take steps to break asunder this ever-strengthening 
chain of encirclement which is being woven under the guidance and with 
the participation of England and the United States, acting like a 
cunning dragon seemingly asleep.  That is why we decided to obtain 
military bases in French Indo-China and to have our troops occupy that 
territory.

"That step in itself, I dare say, gave England and the United States, 
not to mention Russia quite a set-back in the Pacific that ought to help 
Germany, and now Japanese-American relations are more rapidly than ever 
treading the evil road. This shows what a blow it has been to the United 
States.

[Discontinuous text]

"We are expending our best efforts to cooperate with Germany. She knows 
it and ought to understand our actions.

"6. Well, the formula for cooperation between Tokyo and Berlin, in order 
to realize the fundamental spirit of the Tripartite Pact, should be for 
each country to have a certain flexibility in its conduct. What I mean 
to say is that each should understand that real cooperation does not 
necessarily mean complete symmetry of action. In other words, we should 
trust each other and while striving toward one general objective, each 
use our own discretion within the bounds of good judgment.

"Thus, all measures which our Empire shall take will be based upon a 
determination to bring about the success of the objectives of the 
Tripartite Pact. That this is a fact is proven by the promulgation of an 
Imperial rescript. We are ever working toward the realization of those 
objectives, and now during this dire emergency is certainly no time to 
engage in any light unpremeditated or over-speedy action. (Ex. 1, pp. 9-
10.)"

In the meantime, a reply to the American proposals of June 21 had been 
transmitted on July 25 (Japan time) to Ambassador Nomura in Washington 
(ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 26). He had not presented it to Secretary 
Hull, however, because of the change in Japanese Cabinets, because he 
thought it would not be acceptable to the United States Government, and 
because he had received no instructions from the new Cabinet as to how 
to proceed under the circumstances (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 26). 
Still another proposal had then been drawn up in Tokyo and this new 
proposal had been presented to Secretary Hull on August 6 by Ambassador 
Nomura with the statement that it was intended to be responsive to 
President Roosevelt's suggestion for the neutralization of French 
Indochina (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 546-550). The new Japanese proposal had 
asked, either expressly or by implication, that the United States-

"(1) remove the restrictions it had imposed upon trade with Japan; (2) 
suspend its defensive preparations in the Philippines; (3) discontinue 
furnishing military equipment to Great Britain and the Netherlands for 
the arming of their Far Eastern possessions; (4) discontinue aid to the 
Chinese Government; and (5) assent to Japan's assertion and exercise of 
a special military position and a permanent preferential political and 
economic status in Indochina, involving, as this would, assent to 
procedures and disposals which menaced the security of the United States 
and which were contrary to the principles to which this Government was 
committed. In return the Japanese Government offered not to station 
Japanese troops in regions of the southwestern Pacific other than 
Indochina. It proposed to retain its military establishment in Indochina 
for an indeterminate period. There thus would still have remained the 
menace to the security of the United States, already mentioned, as well 
as the menace to the security of British and Dutch territories in the 
southwestern Pacific area (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 344)."

About this time, in Tokyo, Premier Konoye had determined to propose a 
personal meeting between himself and President Roosevelt (ex. 173, 
Konoye Memoirs, p. 29). It is now known that he had presented this idea 
to the Ministers of War and Navy on August 4 (Japan time). Before that 
day ended, the Navy Minister had expressed complete accord and had even 
anticipated the success of the proposed conference (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, p. 30). The Minister of War, General Tojo, however, had replied 
in writing as follows:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 299

"If the Prime Minister were to personally meet with the President of the 
United States, the existing diplomatic relations of the Empire, which 
are based on the Tripartite Pact, would unavoidably be weakened. At the 
same time, a considerable domestic stir would undoubtedly be created. 
For these reasons, the meeting is not considered a suitable move. The 
attempt to surmount the present critical situation by the Prime 
Minister's offering his personal services, is viewed with sincere 
respect and admiration. If, therefore, it is the Prime Minister's 
intention to attend such a meeting *with determination to firmly support 
the basic principles embodied in the Empire's Revised Plan to the "N" 
Plan and to carry out a war against America if the President of the 
United States still fails to comprehend the true intentions of the 
Empire even after this final effort is made*, the Army is not 
necessarily in disagreement.

"However, (1) it is not in favor of the meeting if after making 
preliminary investigations it is learned that the meeting will be with 
someone other than the President, such as Secretary Hull or one in a 
lesser capacity. (2) *You shall not resign your post as a result of the 
meeting on the grounds that it was a failure; rather, you shall be 
prepared to assume leadership in the war against America* (ex. 173, 
Konoye Memoirs, pp. 30-31)."

On August 7 (Japan time) Premier Konoye had been instructed by Emperor 
Hirohito to proceed immediately with arrangements for the meeting (ex. 
173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 31). That day the Premier had sent a telegram to 
Ambassador Nomura, which was translated and available in Washington on 
August 8 (Washington time), directing him to propose such a meeting (ex. 
1, pp. 12-13).

Ambassador Nomura and Secretary Hull had met on August 8 (Washington 
time), and at that meeting the Ambassador had presented the proposal for 
a meeting between President Roosevelt and Premier Konoye. Secretary Hull 
had informed the Ambassador that the new Japanese proposal of August 6 
was not responsive to President Roosevelt's suggestion of July 24 
(Washington time) mentioned above, and, regarding the proposal for a 
meeting between the President and Premier Konoye, had said that it 
remained for the Japanese Government to decide whether it could find 
means of shaping its policies along lines that would make possible an 
adjustment of views between the two Governments (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 
550-551).

The next day, August 9 (Washington time), Secretary Hull had conferred 
with Lord Halifax, the British Ambassador, who had inquired about the 
amount of aid the United States Government would be able to give in case 
the Japanese should attack Singapore or the Dutch East Indies. Secretary 
Hull recorded:

"I replied that I myself have visualized the problem and issue in a 
broader way and that issue is presented by the plan of the Japanese to 
invade by force the whole of the Indian Ocean and the islands and 
continents adjacent thereto, isolating China, sailing across probably to 
the mouth of the Suez Canal, to the Persian Gulf oil area, to the Cape 
of Good Hope area, thereby blocking by a military despotism the trade 
routes and the supply sources to the British. I added that this broad 
military occupation would perhaps be more damaging to British defense in 
Europe than any other step short of the German crossing of the Channel. 
I said that this Government visualizes these broad conditions and the 
problem of resistance which they present; that the activities of this 
Government in the way of discouraging this Japanese movement and of 
resistance will be more or less affected by the British defensive 
situation in Europe and hence by the question of the number of American 
naval vessels and other American aid that may be needed by Great Britain 
at the same time. I said that in the event of further Japanese movements 
south this Government and the British Government should naturally have a 
conference at once and this Government would then be able to determine 
more definitely and in detail its situation pertaining to resistance, in 
the light of the statement I had just made (ex. 28, pp. 710-711).

Page 300             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Except that President Roosevelt had left Washington for the Atlantic 
Conference meeting with Prime Minister Churchill before either of the 
two last-mentioned conferences, [1] the foregoing summarizes briefly the 
immediate background for that Conference so far as relations between the 
United States and Japan were concerned. The Japanese move into southern 
French Indochina while at the same time in Washington Ambassador Nomura 
was engaging in conversations with Secretary Hull looking toward a 
peaceful settlement of problems in the Pacific, and the consequent 
breaking off of those conversations, together with the freezing of 
Japanese assets in the United States, had brought relations between the 
two countries to a critical stage. Moreover, French Indochina, where the 
Japanese forces were establishing themselves, was an area of great 
strategic importance. From it, those forces could strike in many 
directions, toward major objectives. To the east, across the South China 
Sea lay the Philippines. To the west and northwest, across Thailand and 
the Chinese province of Yunnan, lay Rangoon, Kunming, and the Burma 
Road, over which American supplies for China were moving. To the south, 
at the tip of the Malay Peninsula, lay the British naval base at 
Singapore. Beyond Singapore and the Philippines lay the Netherlands East 
Indies, with rubber, oil, and other materials needed by Japan for the 
purposes to which the Japanese Government was committed.

When Under Secretary Welles informed Ambassador Nomura on July 23 
(Washington time) that the conversations were at an end, he said that 
the United States could only assume, first-

"that the occupation of Indochina by Japan constituted notice to the 
United States that the Japanese Government intended to pursue a policy 
of force and of conquest, and, second, that in the light of these acts 
on the part of Japan, the United States, with regard to its own safety 
in the light of its own preparations for self-defense, must assume *that 
the Japanese Government was taking the last step before proceeding upon 
a policy of totalitarian expansion in the South Seas and of conquest in 
the South Seas through the seizure of additional territories in that 
region* (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 525).

[**THE ATLANTIC CONFERENCE**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(August 9-14, 1941)**

The meeting between President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, 
each accompanied by high officials of their respective Governments, took 
place at sea near Argentia, Newfoundland, during the second week in 
August 1941. At it the President and the Prime Minister agreed upon the 
joint declaration of principles which has since become known as the 
Atlantic Charter (tr. 1359-1364).  Their conversations also dealt with 
steps which Great Britain and the United States were taking for their 
safety in the face of the policies of aggression of the German 
Government and other governments associated with the German Government. 
They discussed such matters as the proposed occupation of the Canary 
Islands by the British Government to guard the southern Atlantic convoy 
route into the 

[1] Former Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles testified, however, 
that he believed he (Welles) left Washington for the Atlantic Conference 
the evening of August 8 (Washington time) (tr. 1254).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           Page 301

British Isles, a proposal that the Portuguese Government request the 
Government of the United States for assistance in the defense of the 
Azores as a means of assurance that those islands would not be occupied 
by Germany, and the protection of the Cape Verde Islands against Axis 
aggressors (ex. 22-C).  The President and the Prime Minister also 
discussed the situation in the Far East. During those discussions Mr. 
Churchill submitted a proposal for parallel declarations by the United 
States, British, and Dutch Governments warning Japan against new moves 
of military aggression. [1] This proposal also contemplated that the 
Russian Government would be kept fully informed of such steps (ex. 22). 
The final discussion of Mr. Churchill's proposal occurred on August 11 
(ex. 22-C). According to Under Secretary Welles' record of that 
discussion-

"The President gave Mr. Churchill to read copies of the two statements 
handed to Secretary Hull by the Japanese Ambassador on August 6.

"The Prime Minister read them carefully and then remarked that the 
implication was that Japan, having already occupied Indochina, said that 
she would move no further provided the United States would abandon their 
economic and financial sanctions and take no further military or naval 
defensive measures and further agree to concessions to Japan, including 
the opportunity for Japan to strangle the Chinese Government, all of 
which were particularly unacceptable (ex. 22-C)."

The President replied that that was about the picture as he saw it, and 
after expressing his strong feeling that "every effort should be made to 
prevent the outbreak of war with Japan," he stated the procedure with 
respect to Japan that he intended to follow upon his return to 
Washington. He told the Prime Minister that he would inform Ambassador 
Nomura that if the Japanese Government would give satisfactory 
assurances that it would not further station its troops in the 
Southwestern Pacific areas, except French Indochina, and that the 
Japanese troops now stationed in French Indochina would be withdrawn, 
the United States Government-would-resume the informal conversations 
with the Japanese Government. He said that he would further state that 
if Japan should refuse to consider this procedure and should undertake 
further steps in the nature of military expansions, in his belief 
various steps would have to be taken by the United States 
notwithstanding his realization that the taking of such measures might 
result in war between the United States and Japan (ex 22-C).  Mr. 
Churchill immediately concurred in this procedure (ex 22-C).

There was then discussed-

"the desirability of informing Russia of the steps which would be taken 
as above set forth and of possibly including in the warning to Japan a 
statement which would cover any aggressive steps by Japan against the 
Soviet Union (ex. 22-C)."

Under Secretary Welles expressed the view that the real issue involved 
was whether or not Japan would continue its policy of conquest by force 
in the entire Pacific and suggested that the statement which the 
President intended to make-

"might more advantageously be based on the question of broad policy 
rather than be premised solely upon Japanese moves in the southwestern 
Pacific area (ex. 22-C).

[1] The record before the Committee also shows that in February 1941, 
just before the Lend-Lease Act-described by Prime Minister Churchill as 
"the Bill on which our hopes depend"-was enacted by Congress, the Prime 
Minister and Lord Halifax, the British Ambassador, had urged upon 
President Roosevelt and Secretary Hull their desire for some action by 
the United States "to deter the Japanese" (ex. 158).

Page 302                       PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

The President and Mr. Churchill both agreed to this, and "*it was 
decided that the step to be taken by the President* [1] would be taken 
in that sense" (ex. 22-C).

Consideration was then given the question whether or not President 
Roosevelt should include in his statement to Ambassador Nomura a 
statement with respect to British policy concerning French Indochina and 
Thailand (ex. 22-C). However, since the statement ultimately made by the 
President to Ambassador Nomura did not mention British policy concerning 
those countries this latter proposal appears to have been dropped (ex. 
29, vol. II, pp. 554-559).

Under Secretary Welles returned to Washington from Argentia several days 
before President Roosevelt, at the latter's request.  Upon his arrival, 
he advised Secretary Hull of what had transpired there, and, at the 
President's further request, he prepared the initial draft (ex. 22) of 
the proposed warning to Japan from notes he had made of his final 
conversation with the President before leaving Argentia (tr. 1259). A 
revised draft was given to Secretary Hull by Mr. Welles on August 16, 
1941 (ex. 22-A), and was further revised by the Secretary and his 
advisors on Far Eastern affairs before being communicated to Ambassador 
Nomura by the President (tr. 1272).

[**PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT WARNS JAPAN AGAINST FURTHER AGGRESSION AND AT THE SAME TIME OFFERS TO RESUME THE JAPANESE-AMERICAN CONVERSATIONS**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(August 17, 1941)**

President Roosevelt returned to Washington Sunday morning, August 17 
(Washington time) . Late that afternoon, Ambassador Nomura met with the 
President and Secretary Hull at the White House, at the President's 
request (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 554 et seq.; ex. 124). [2] Mr. Roosevelt 
read and then handed to Admiral Nomura the document

[1] The evidence before the Committee is conflicting as to whether or 
not Prime Minister Churchill promised President Roosevelt that the 
British Government would take action parallel to that to be taken by the 
United States Government.

The only contemporaneous records of the Atlantic Conference before the 
Committee are three memoranda prepared by Under Secretary Welles (ex. 
22-B, 22-C, 22-D). Those memoranda show that the procedure outlined by 
President Roosevelt differed substantially from that envisaged in Prime 
Minister Churchill's proposal. As there described by Mr. Welles, the 
President's procedure did not call for parallel action by either the 
British or Dutch Governments, or for keeping Russia informed, as Mr. 
Churchill had proposed. Nor, as is the case of Mr. Churchill's proposal, 
was the precise phraseology of the warning to Japan prescribed, it being 
left entirely up to the President. Mr. Welles testified that the promise 
given by the President to Mr. Churchill "was limited to the fact that a 
warning would be given" (tr. 1422) and that the only agreement reached 
between the President and the Prime Minister was "that the President 
made the promise to Mr. Churchill that the Government of the United 
States, in its own words and in its own way, would issue a warning to 
the Japanese Government of the character which actually was made by the 
President on August 17" (tr. 1428).

While it is true that Mr. Welles testified that the promise made by 
President Roosevelt was to "take parallel action with the British 
Government in warning the Japanese Government" (tr. 12354) and that he 
"took it for granted Mr. Churchill must have made that statement" (i. e. 
promised to make a parallel warning) to the President (tr. 1446), it is 
also true that when asked directly whether the President had told him 
that Mr. Churchill had promised to make a parallel warning, Mr. Welles 
said, "the President in his conversation with me, so far as I remember, 
did not make that specific statement" (tr. 1446). Moreover, as 
previously noted, the Welles' memoranda neither state nor indicate that 
any such promise was made by Mr. Churchill (ex. 22-B, 22-C, 22-D), and 
there is no evidence before the Committee showing that action parallel 
to the President's warning to Japan was ever taken by the British 
Government. On the other hand both "Peace and War" {ex. 28, p. 129) and 
"Foreign Relations of the United States, Japan 1931-1941" (ex. 29, vol. 
II, p. 345) refer to an "agreement" to take parallel action made by 
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, though, of course, 
neither of these purports to be a contemporaneous account of the 
Atlantic Conference. Likewise, in his testimony before the Committee, 
Secretary Hull referred to such an "agreement." Though again Secretary 
Hull did not attend the Atlantic Conference (tr. 1116).

[2] This discussion of the meeting referred to in the text, and the 
discussions in this appendix of other meetings in Washington or Tokyo 
between representatives of the United States Government and the Japanese 
Government, are based primarily upon the official State Department 
records of such meetings appearing in Volumes I and II of " Foreign 
Relations of the United States, Japan, 1931-1941" (ex. 29) and upon 
intercepted Japanese messages between Washington and Tokyo reporting 
such meetings, the Committee exhibits in which such messages appear 
being indicated-in all cases. Reference is made to such records and 
reports, only the material portions of which have been quoted or 
summarized here.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        Page 303

drafted by Mr. Welles and the Secretary. It noted that notwithstanding 
the protracted conversations engaged in by the United States and 
Japanese Governments looking toward a peaceful settlement in the Pacific 
and the President's suggestion on July 24, 1941, for the 
"neutralization" of French Indochina, the Japanese Government had 
continued to dispose its armed forces at various points in the Far East 
and had occupied French Indochina. Reading from the document, President 
Roosevelt said that the United States Government felt that at the 
present stage "nothing short of the most complete candor on its part in 
the light of the evidence and indications" in its possession would tend 
to further the objectives sought. He then warned Japan against further 
aggression, saying:

"Such being the case, this Government now finds it necessary to say to 
the Government of Japan that if the Japanese Government takes any 
further steps in pursuance of a policy or program of military domination 
by force or threat of force of neighboring countries, the Government of 
the United States will be compelled to take immediately any and all 
steps which it may deem necessary toward safe-guarding the legitimate 
rights and interests of the United States and American nationals and 
toward insuring the safety and security of the United States (ex. 29,
vol. II, pp. 556-557)."

On behalf of his Government, Ambassador Nomura reasserted the sincerity 
of its desire to bring about an adjustment of Japanese-American 
diplomatic relations. He expressed his Government's desire to be advised 
as to the possibility of arranging a meeting between President Roosevelt 
and Premier Konoye and of resuming the informal conversations which had 
been terminated by the United States in July because of the Japanese 
occupation of southern French Indochina. He stated, however, that he 
felt no further explanations regarding his Government's actions in 
French Indochina, in addition to the views already expressed to 
Secretary Hull, were necessary. 

The President then read and handed to Ambassador Nomura a second 
document. It opened with a reference to the Japanese proposal of August 
8 (Washington time) for a meeting between himself and Premier Konoye and 
to the Japanese desire for resumption of the informal conversations. The 
President said that the United States Government would be prepared to 
resume the conversations provided the Japanese Government felt that 
Japan desired and was in a position to suspend its expansionist 
activities, and to embark upon a peaceful program for the Pacific along 
the lines of the program to which the United States was committed. His 
statement concluded:

"the Government of the United States, however, feels that, in view of 
the circumstances attending the interruption of the informal 
conversations between the two Governments, it would be helpful to both 
Governments, before undertaking a resumption of such conversations or 
proceeding with plans for a meeting, if the Japanese Government would be 
so good as to furnish a clearer statement than has yet been furnished as 
to its present attitude and plans, just as this Government has 
repeatedly outlined to the Japanese Government its attitude and plans 
(ex. 29, vol. II, p. 559)."

In Ambassador Nomura's report to Tokyo on this meeting, he emphasized 
the "graveness with which he (President Roosevelt) views Japanese-U. S. 
relations." The Ambassador expressed the view that the Japanese proposal 
for a "leaders' conference" between President Roosevelt and Premier 
Konoye had "considerably eased" the attitude of the United States 
Government and that there was no room for doubt "that the President 
hopes that matters will take a turn for the better" (ex 124).

Page 304                           PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

The next day, August 18 (Washington time), President Roosevelt sent a 
message to Prime Minister Churchill describing his meeting with 
Ambassador Nomura. This message indicates that the President did not 
learn until after his return to Washington of the Ambassador's request 
on August 16 (Washington time) for a resumption of the informal 
conversations. In his message, the President told Mr. Churchill that-

"I made to him (Admiral Nomura) a statement covering the position of 
this Government with respect to the taking by Japan of further steps in 
the direction of military domination by force along the lines of the 
proposed statement such as you and I had discussed. The statement I made 
to him was no less vigorous than and was substantially similar to the 
statement we had discussed (ex. 70)."

The evidence before the Committee does not show whether or not the 
British Government took "parallel action" to the warning given Japan by 
President Roosevelt. Under Secretary Welles testified before the 
Committee that he took it for granted that the British Government took 
such parallel action and that the records of the State Department would 
probably show that (tr. 1279), but Secretary Hull testified, and the 
State Department has advised the Committee, that its files contain no 
record of any such action (tr. 14, 306; 4480).  Furthermore, as late as 
November 30 (Washington time), Prime Minister Churchill sent a message 
to the President saying that "one important method remains unused in 
averting war between Japan and our two countries, namely a plain 
declaration, secret or public as may be thought best, that any further 
act of aggression by Japan will lead immediately to the gravest 
consequences. * * * We would, of course, make a similar declaration or 
share in a joint declaration" (ex. 24); and the evidence further shows 
that on December 7 the Prime Minister submitted to President Roosevelt a 
draft of a proposed warning to Japan (tr. 13738-13740). On the other 
hand, on August 25, 1941, in an address reporting to Parliament on the 
Atlantic Conference, the Prime Minister said:

"But Europe is not the only continent to be tormented and devastated by 
aggression. For five long years the Japanese military factions, seeking 
to emulate the style of Hitler and Mussolini, taking all their posturing 
as if it were a new European revelation, have been invading and harrying 
the 500,000,000 inhabitants of China.  Japanese armies have been 
wandering about that vast land in futile excursions, carrying with them 
carnage, ruin and corruption, and calling it "the Chinese incident." Now 
they stretch a grasping hand into the southern seas of China. They 
snatch Indo-China from the wretched Vichy French.  They menace by their 
movements Siam, menace Singapore, the British link with Australasia, and 
menace the Philippine islands under the protection of the United States.

"It is certain that this has got to stop. Every effort will be made to 
secure a peaceful settlement. The United States are laboring with 
infinite patience to arrive at a fair and amicable settlement which will 
give Japan the utmost reassurance for her legitimate interests. We 
earnestly hope these negotiations will succeed. But this I must say: 
That if these hopes should fail we shall, of course, range ourselves 
unhesitatingly at the side of the United States (tr. 1355-1356; 4480-
4481)."

While Secretary Hull testified that he knew of no parallel action taken 
by the British other than this address (tr. 14306), which was broadcast 
by radio, Under Secretary Welles testified that in his opinion this 
address did not constitute "parallel action" of the kind proposed by Mr. 
Churchill to the President, and that in Mr. Welles'

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK                    Page 305

judgment such action would necessarily have had to have been in the form 
of an exchange of diplomatic notes (tr. 1356). [1]

On August 21 (Washington time) President Roosevelt sent a message to 
Congress describing the meeting at Argentia (tr. 1359-1364).  This 
message embodied the text of the "Atlantic Charter" and referred in 
general terms to other matters discussed at the meeting, but made no 
specific mention of the proposal to issue a warning to Japan. Under 
Secretary Welles testified that publication of the proposal to issue a 
warning to Japan or of the President's warning, itself, would not have 
been conducive to a successful result in attempting to find a peaceful 
solution, as it would have inflamed public opinion in Japan (tr. 1277).

[**JAPAN PROTESTS UNITED STATES SHIPMENTS OF OIL TO RUSSIA**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(August 27, 1941)**

The Japanese reply to President Roosevelt's request on August 17 
(Washington time) for a " clearer statement than has yet been furnished 
as to its present attitude and plans" was not received until August 28 
(Washington time). During the interval between those dates, Ambassador 
Nomura reported to the Japanese Foreign Office an increasing interest on 
the part of President Roosevelt in participating in the resumption of 
the Japanese-American negotiations and stated that, in his opinion, "the 
President is the one who shows the most interest in the 'leaders 
conference' " (ex. 124). About the same time the Ambassador received a 
report from Tokyo concerning the Foreign Minister's talk with Ambassador 
Grew on August 18 (Japan time) at which Ambassador Grew indicated that 
he would give the proposed meeting his personal support (ex. 124). On 
August 23 (Japan time) the Foreign Minister cabled Ambassador Nomura 
that "everything in our power" was being done " to rush our reply to the 
United States and at the same time to bring about the 'leaders 
conference' at an earlier date" (ex. 124). The next day Ambassador 
Nomura called of Secretary Hull and reported that his Government wanted 
the "leaders conference" to take place before October 15. The reason he 
gave for this was the fear in Tokyo that the impression would be created 
that Japan " had given in in the face of the threat of 'encirclement' " 
if the proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting should follow a reported 
British-U. S.-Soviet conference to be held at an earlier date (ex. 124; 
ex. 29, vol. II, p. 568).

At about this time the German Ambassador in Japan, General Ott, received 
intelligence reports that the United States was preparing to ship oil to 
Russia via Vladivostok, that the first of the transporting vessels had 
already sailed, that they would soon sail in rapid succession, and that 
the oil would undoubtedly be used by Russia for an attack upon Japan. 
General Ott repeated this information to the Vice Minister for Foreign 
Affairs during an interview on August 19 (Japan time), and in reply the 
Vice Minister said that the problem of American oil was receiving very 
careful attention (ex. 132-A, item C). The nest day, and again on August 
22 (Japan time), the Foreign

[1] There is also before the Committee a memorandum of Dr. Stanley K. 
Hornbeck, Political Advisor to Secretary Hull, dated, however, February 
28, 1944, in which it is stated that toward the end of August 1941, the 
British and American Governments "served on Japan a strong warning" 
against further extending her courses of aggression (ex. 108).

Page 306             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Minister cabled Ambassador Nomura requesting him to call the attention 
of the United States authorities to the fact that if it should become 
known in Japan that the United States was shipping iron, airplanes, and 
other materials to Russia by way of Japanese coastal waters, this might 
have an adverse effect upon Japanese-American relations (ex. 1, p. 19; 
ex. 124). Ambassador Nomura told Secretary Hull during their 
conversation on August 23 (Washington time) that the shipment of oil by 
the United States to Russia through Japanese waters "would naturally 
give the Japanese real concern at an early date" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 
566). A more urgent message concerning this matter was sent from Tokyo 
to Ambassador Nomura on August 26 (Japan time) requesting him to "make 
representations again to the Secretary of State in order that he may 
reconsider an immediate cessation of these measures from the general 
viewpoint of the current Japan-American diplomatic relations" (ex. 1, p. 
21 ) . Representations of this nature were made to Ambassador Grew in 
Tokyo the next day (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 569), and on August 27 
(Washington time) Ambassador Nomura orally protested to Secretary Hull 
against American shipments of oil to Russia through Japanese waters. 
Secretary Hull stated that only two tankers were involved and that the 
shipments were entirely valid under all the laws of commerce (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 570).

[**PREMIER KONOYE SENDS A PERSONAL MESSAGE TO PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT URGING THE PROPOSED "LEADERS CONFERENCE"**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(August 28, 1941)**

Premier Konoye replied to President Roosevelt's statement of August 17 
(Washington time) in a personal message which Ambassador Nomura handed 
to the President at a conference at the White House on the morning of 
August 28 (Washington time). The Premier's message was accompanied by a 
statement which the Japanese Government intended to be responsive to the 
President's suggestion that it would be helpful if that Government would 
furnish a clearer statement of its present attitude and plans than had 
as yet been given (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 571-572).

In his message to President Roosevelt, Premier Konoye urged that the 
meeting between himself and the President be arranged "as soon as 
possible." He said that while the preliminary informal negotiations that 
were terminated in July had been "quite appropriate both in spirit and 
content," nevertheless-

"the idea of continuing those conversations and to have their conclusion 
confirmed by the responsible heads of the two Governments does not meet 
the need of the present situation which is developing swiftly and may 
produce unforeseen contingencies

"I consider it, therefore, of urgent necessity that the two heads of the 
Governments should meet first to discuss from a broad standpoint all 
important problems between Japan and America covering the entire Pacific 
area, and to explore the possibility of saving the situation.  
Adjustment of minor items may, if necessary be left to negotiations 
between competent officials of the two countries, following the meeting 
(ex. 29, vol. II, p. 573)."

The statement which accompanied Premier Konoye's message referred, among 
other things, to the-

"principles and directives set forth in detail by the United States 
Government and envisaged in the informal conversations as constituting a 
program for the Pacific area-

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK                 Page 307

and continued-

"The Japanese Government wishes to state that it considers these 
principles and the practical application thereof, in the friendliest 
manner possible, are the prime requisites of a true peace and should be 
applied not only in the Pacific area but throughout the entire world. 
Such a program has long been desired and sought by Japan itself (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 575)."

However, while the statement contained many assurances regarding Japan's 
peaceful intentions, the more important assurances were qualified or 
conditional. Thus, the Japanese Government was prepared to withdraw its 
troops from Indochina, but only "as soon as the China incident is 
settled or a just peace is established in East Asia"; concerning Soviet-
Japanese relations it was said that Japan would take no military action 
"as long as the Soviet Union remains faithful to the Soviet-Japanese 
neutrality treaty and does not menace Japanese Manchukuo or take any 
action contrary to the spirit of the said treaty"; the Japanese 
Government had no intention, it was said, of using, "without 
provocation" military force against any neighboring nation (ex. 29, vol. 
II, pp. 573-576).

Ambassador Nomura reported to his Government that President Roosevelt " 
vas well pleased" with the Premier's message (ex. 124).  The President 
had said, he cabled, "I am looking forward to having approximately three 
days talk with Prince Konoye", but that Hawaii was out of the question 
as a meeting place and that he would prefer Juneau, Alaska. The 
Ambassador quoted the President as having "smilingly and cynically" said 
during his reading of the message:

"Though I am looking forward to conversations with Prince Konoye, I 
wonder whether invasion of Thailand can be expected during those 
conversations just as an invasion of French Indo-China occurred during 
Secretary Hull's conversations with your Excellency (ex. 124)."

The evening of the same day, August 28 (Washington time), Ambassador 
Nomura called on Secretary Hull and outlined to the Secretary his ideas 
concerning the arrangements for the proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting. 
During this conversation, the Secretary pointed out to Ambassador Nomura 
the desirability of there being reached in advance of the proposed 
meeting "an agreement in principle on the principal questions which were 
involved in a settlement of Pacific questions between the two nations." 
The Secretary said that if the proposed meeting should fail to result in 
an agreement, serious consequences from the point of view of both 
Governments would ensue. He expressed the view that therefore the 
purpose of the proposed meeting should be "the ratification of essential 
points agreed upon in principle" (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 576-577). 
Ambassador Nomura concluded his report of this meeting to Tokyo with the 
comment:

"In general, it may be said that the Secretary of State is an 
exceedingly cautious person. There are indications that he is 
considering this matter from many angles. I feel that unless we are in 
fairly close agreement the "leaders conference" will not materialize 
(ex. 124)."

[**GERMANY SUSPECTS TREACHERY**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(August 29-30, 1941)**

It became known to the American press, soon after Ambassador Nomura left 
the White House following his conference with President Roosevelt and 
Secretary Hull on August 28 (Washington time), that 

Page 308                          PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

the Ambassador had delivered a personal message to the President from 
Premier Konoye. Whether this information was given out by Secretary Hull 
or by Ambassador Nomura is not clear from the record before the 
Committee (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 582-583; ex. 124); however, as a result 
of the disclosure, Foreign Minister Toyoda became greatly concerned that 
the proposed "leaders conference" should be kept absolutely secret, 
fearing the project would fail if news of it should leak out before a 
settlement was reached. The Foreign Minister cabled Ambassador Nomura 
twice on August 29 (Japan time) urging him "to take every precaution" to 
guard against leaks (ex. 124).

This concern in Tokyo over the effect of publicity on the conversations 
and the proposed "leaders conference" was a major reason for calls by 
the Director of the American Bureau of the Japanese Foreign Office on 
Ambassador Grew on August 29 and September 3 (Japan time) and for a call 
by Ambassador Nomura on Secretary Hull on September 1 (Washington time) 
(ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 579-582, 586-587, 583-585). During his first 
conversation with Ambassador Grew, the Director, Mr. Terasaki, dwelt at 
some length on the unfortunate effects of the publicity in Washington 
about Premier Konoye's message to President Roosevelt, and then 
communicated to the Ambassador an appeal from Foreign Minister Toyoda 
that (1) the proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting be arranged without delay 
and (2) pending the outcome of the proposed meeting, the United States 
postpone the sending oil tankers to the Soviet Union and suspend the 
order freezing Japanese assets in the United States. Ambassador Grew's 
memorandum of this meeting noted that he left Mr. Terasaki "under no 
illusion" that the United States Government would find it possible to 
agree to either of the "preposterous requests" contained in (2) above 
(ex. 29, vol. II, p. 582). Ambassador Nomura's conference with Secretary 
Hull on September 1 (Washington time) was concerned largely with 
discussion of the effect upon the conversations of the positions taken 
by the press in Japan and the United States. The Secretary took 
advantage of the occasion to ask the Ambassador what would happen if an 
agreement should not be reached at the proposed "leaders conference," 
and to repeat his suggestion that an effort be made to reach an 
agreement in principle on fundamental questions before the meeting (ex. 
29, vol. II, pp. 583-585).

As a result of the fear in Tokyo of publicity, Ambassador Nomura wrote a 
brief note to Secretary Hull on August 29 (Washington time) requesting 
his cooperation in keeping the conversations secret. The Secretary 
replied on September 2 (Washington time) saying that he would "be glad 
to conform to the desires of yourself and your Government in the 
foregoing respect, to every extent practical" (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 579, 
586). However, apparently believing that some official comment was 
needed in view of the rumors and speculation in Tokyo about Ambassador 
Nomura's meeting with President Roosevelt, at 2:30 p. M. On August 29 
(Japan time). The Japanese Foreign Office released an official statement 
that Ambassador Nomura had called on President Roosevelt on August 28 
and had delivered to the President a message from Premier Konoye stating 
"Japan's view regarding Pacific problems which are pending between Japan 
and the United States" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 579). Ambassador Grew 
advised Secretary Hull of this announcement later the same afternoon 
(ex. 29, vol. II, p. 579).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        Page 309

Foreign Minister Toyoda feared publicity because of "the exceedingly 
complex domestic situation" and the consideration which had to be given 
to "our relations with Germany and Italy" (ex. 124).  What the Foreign 
Minister had in mind in the first connection is indicated by his cable 
to Ambassador Nomura on September 3 (Japan time), in which he said:

"Since the existence of the Premier's message was inadvertently made 
known to the public, that gang that has been suspecting that unofficial 
talks were taking place, has really begun to yell and wave the 
Tripartite Pact banner (ex. 1, p. 25)."

In the second connection, it is now known from captured Japanese 
documents that less than 4 hours after the Tokyo announcement of Premier 
Konoye's message to President Roosevelt, General Ott, the German 
Ambassador, called on the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Amau, 
and demanded to know whether the Premier's message departed from the 
policy determined at the Imperial Conference on July 2, which had been 
secretly communicated to the German Government, and whether the Cabinet 
was contemplating any change in that regard (ex. 132-A, item C). The 
Vice Minister replied that the message did not mean that there had been 
"a change in Japan's policy, nor that we are contemplating any change in 
our relations with the Axis." The reason for sending the message, he 
told the Ambassador, "was to clarify the atmosphere in the Pacific" and 
to attempt "to start conversations between the two parties." Ambassador 
Ott suggested that "precautions must be taken against America's scheme 
to prolong these negotiations, so that this might work to her 
advantage," to which the Vice Minister replied that "we have given the 
matter careful thought so that the carrying on of negotiations by Japan 
with America might not have any disadvantageous consequences upon 
Germany and Italy." "Our aim," he said, "is to keep her (America) from 
joining in the war." The German Ambassador then requested an interview 
with Foreign Minister Toyoda, which took place on the afternoon of 
August 30 (Japan time). At that interview General Ott again demanded to 
know whether the intentions of Japan were still as secretly communicated 
to Germany on July 2. The Foreign Minister denied that there had been 
any change in Japan's intentions, and stated that Japan's preparations 
to avail herself of any new developments "are now making headway." The 
German Ambassador said:

"In Foreign Minister Matsuoka's time the Japanese government authorities 
thought that what America was planning to do was to get Japan to take an 
attitude in conflict with the Tripartite Pact, that is, to give up 
taking any positive action in the Pacific area no matter what occasion 
might arise, and Germany is very grateful that at the time the Japanese 
government resolutely resisted these American designs, and we hope that 
it will continue to take that "line." I would like to ask what Your 
Excellency's views are concerning this point (ex. 132-A, item C)."

Admiral Toyoda replied:

"In a word I may say that the purpose of the Tripartite Pact is to 
prevent American participation in the war, and that this view is the 
same as in the past; nor will it change in the future (ex. 132-A, item 
C)."

The Japanese Ambassador in Berlin reported to Tokyo on October 1, 1941, 
that because of the Japanese-American negotiations everyone in the 
German Foreign Office was "thoroughly disgusted with Japan."  He said 
that the fact that the feeling of German leaders and people in

Page  310                           PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

general toward Japan was getting bad could not be covered up, and that 
if Japan were to go ahead with the negotiations without consulting 
Germany, "there is no telling what steps Germany may take without 
consulting Japan" (ex. 1, pp. 4849).

In Italy, the impression created by the Japanese-American talks was not 
enthusiastic, as the Japanese Ambassador in Rome reported to the Foreign 
Office on September 30:

"Our recent negotiations with the United States have put a bad taste in 
the mouths of the people of this country. Our attitude toward the 
Tripartite Alliance appears to them to be faithless. Recently the 
newspapers have been growing more critical in tone where we Japanese are 
concerned. Official comment, too, has been none too complimentary. As 
for Italy's attitude toward the recent celebration of the first 
anniversary of the conclusion of the Japanese-German-Italian Tripartite 
Alliance, its coolness reflects the attitude of the whole Italian people 
(ex. 1, p. 44)."

[**PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT REPLIES TO PREMIER KONOYE'S MESSAGE**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(September 5, 1941)**

President Roosevelt handed to Ambassador Nomura his reply to Premier 
Konoye at a conference at the White House on the afternoon of September 
3 (Washington time) (Ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 588-592). The President's 
reply mentioned the reference in the statement which had accompanied the 
Premier's message to the basic principles to which the United States 
Government had long been committed and the President's desire to 
collaborate in making these principles effective in practice. The 
President stated that his deep interest in this matter made it necessary 
for him to observe and take account of developments both in the United 
States and Japan which had a bearing on Japanese-American relations, and 
that he could not avoid taking cognizance of indications-

"of the existence in some quarters in Japan of concepts which, if widely 
entertained, would seem capable of raising obstacles to successful 
collaboration between you and me along the line which I am sure both of 
us earnestly desire to follow (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 592)."

The President then suggested:

"that it would seem highly desirable that we take precaution, toward 
ensuring that our proposed meeting shall prove a success, by endeavoring 
to enter immediately upon preliminary discussion of the fundamental and 
essential questions on which we seek agreement. The questions which I 
have in mind for such preliminary discussions involve practical 
application of the principles fundamental to achievement and maintenance 
of peace which are mentioned with more specification in the statement 
accompanying your letter. I hope that you will look favorably upon this 
suggestion (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 592)."

The President also read and handed to Ambassador Nomura a statement 
which referred to the American proposals of June 21 (Washington time) 
and to the fact that subsequent conversations bad disclosed that there 
were divergences of view between the two Governments with respect to 
certain fundamental questions dealt with in those proposals. Reading 
from the statement, the President expressed the desire of the United 
States Government "to facilitate progress toward a conclusive 
discussion" and its belief-

"that a community of view and a clear agreement upon the points above 
mentioned are essential to any satisfactory settlement of Pacific 
questions. It therefore seeks an indication of the present attitude of 
the Japanese Government with regard to the fundamental questions under 
reference (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 591)."

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 311

In connection with this statement, it will be remembered that the second 
Konoye Cabinet had resigned on July 16 (Japan time) and had been 
replaced by the third Konoye Cabinet the next day (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, p. 24).

In his memorandum of the conversation with Ambassador Nomura, Secretary 
Hull wrote:

"Both the President and I repeatedly emphasized the necessity for his 
(i. e. Ambassador Nomura's) Government to clarify its position on the 
question of abandoning a policy of force and conquest and on three 
fundamental questions concerning which difficulties had been encountered 
in our discussion of the Japanese proposal of May twelfth and the 
discussion of which we had not pursued after the Japanese went into 
Indochina (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 588)."

[**JAPAN PRESENTS NEW PROPOSALS IN A NEW FORM**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(September 6, 1941)**

It is now known that about the time President Roosevelt was meeting with 
Ambassador Nomura, new Japanese proposals were being discussed at a 
Joint Conference of Japanese Foreign Office and War and Navy officials 
in Tokyo. According to Premier Konoye, these new proposals were intended 
by the Foreign Office to bring up only "immediate and concrete problems" 
and to focus the proposed meeting between President Roosevelt and the 
Premier on those problems. The Foreign Office took the position that it 
was difficult to predict how long it would take to consider all of the 
important fundamental principles dealt with in the proposals which had 
been under consideration by the two Governments before the freezing 
orders, and that consequently "the present crisis might not be averted" 
if it should be necessary to consider all of those principles (ex. 173, 
Konoye Memoirs, p. 37). The new proposals were approved at the Joint 
Conference mentioned above and were given to Ambassador Grew by Foreign 
Minister Toyoda the next day, September 4 (Japan time), with the request 
that they be transmitted to Secretary Hull by the Ambassador to overcome 
any possibility of inaccuracy in handling by Ambassador Nomura (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 593).

Ambassador Nomura presented the new proposals to Secretary Hull at a 
meeting on September 6 (Washington time). He explained that although the 
new proposals had been prepared by the Japanese Government before it 
received President Roosevelt's reply of September 3 (Washington time), 
nevertheless his Government believed that the contents of the new 
proposals constituted a reply to the President.  He said that the 
proposals were also in response to the view expressed by Secretary Hull 
at the conference with him on the evening of August 28, namely, that it 
would be desirable for the two Governments to reach an agreement in 
principle on the fundamental questions involved before making 
arrangements for the proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting (ex. 29, vol. II, 
pp. 606-607). As presented to Secretary Hull the new Japanese proposals 
were as follows:

         DRAFT PROPOSAL HANDED BY THE JAPANESE AMBASSADOR (NOMURA) 
         TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE ON SEPTEMBER 6, 1941

The Government of Japan undertakes:
    (a) that Japan is ready to express its concurrence in those matters 
  which were already tentatively agreed upon between Japan and the 
  United States in the course of their preliminary informal  
  conversations;

312             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

    (b) that Japan will not make any military advancement from French
  Indo-China against any of its adjoining areas, and likewise will not, 
  without any justifiable reason, resort to military action against any 
  regions lying south of Japan;
    (c) that the attitudes of Japan and the United States towards the 
  European War will be decided by the concepts of protection and self-
  defense, and, in case the United States should participate in the 
  European War, the interpretation and execution of the Tripartite Pact 
  by Japan shall be independently decided;
    (d) that Japan will endeavor to bring about the rehabilitation of 
  general and normal relationship between Japan and China, upon the 
  realization of which Japan is ready to withdraw its armed forces from 
  China as soon as possible in accordance with the agreements between 
  Japan and China;
    (e) that the economic activities of the United States in China will 
  not be restricted so long as pursued on an equitable basis;
    (f) that Japan's activities in the Southwestern Pacific Area will be 
  carried on by peaceful means and in accordance with the principle of 
  nondiscrimination in international commerce, and that Japan will 
  cooperate in the production and procurement by the United States of 
  natural resources in the said area which it needs;
    (g) that Japan will take measures necessary for the resumption of 
  normal trade relations between Japan and the United States, and in 
  connection with the above-mentioned, Japan is ready to discontinue 
  immediately the application of the foreigners' transactions control 
  regulations with regard to the United States on the basis of 
  reciprocity.

"The Government of the United States undertakes:
 
    (a) that, in response to the Japanese Government's commitment 
  expressed in point (d) referred to above, the United States will 
  abstain from any measures and actions which will be prejudicial to the 
  endeavor by Japan concerning the settlement of the China Affair;
    (b) that the United States will reciprocate Japan's commitment
  expressed in point (f) referred to above;
    (c) that the United States will suspend any military measures in the 
  Far East and in the Southwestern Pacific Area;
    (d) that the United States will immediately (upon settlement)
  reciprocate Japan's commitment expressed in point (g) referred to 
  above by discontinuing the application of the so-called freezing act 
  with regard to Japan and further by removing the prohibition against 
  the passage of Japanese vessels through the Panama Canal (ex. 29, vol.
  II, pp. 608-609)."

Secretary Hull testified that these new Japanese proposals-

"were much narrower than the assurances given in the statement 
communicated to the President on August 28. In the September 6 Japanese 
draft the Japanese gave only an evasive formula with regard to their 
obligations under the Tripartite Pact.  There was a qualified 
undertaking that Japan would not "without any justifiable reason" resort 
to military action against any region south of Japan.  No commitment was 
offered in regard to the nature of the terms which Japan would offer to 
China; nor any assurance of an intention by Japan to respect China's 
territorial integrity and sovereignty, to refrain from interference in 
China's internal affairs, not to station Japanese troops indefinitely in 
wide areas of China, and to conform to the principle of 
nondiscrimination in international commercial relations. The formula 
contained in that draft that "the economic activities of the United 
States in China will not be restricted so long as pursued on an 
equitable basis" clearly implied a concept that the conditions under 
which American trade and commerce in China were henceforth to be 
conducted were to be a matter for decision by Japan (tr. 1118-1119)."

On September 9 (Washington time) Secretary Hull cabled to Ambassador 
Grew a series of questions to be submitted to Foreign Minister Toyoda 
regarding the intentions of the Japanese Government in offering certain 
of the new proposals, especially those relating to China (ex. 29, vol. 
II, pp. 610-613). The Foreign Minister's replies to these questions were 
received by Ambassador Grew on September 13 (Japan time) and promptly 
cabled to Washington (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 620-624).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           Page 313

On September 15 (Washington time) Ambassador Nomura cabled Foreign 
Minister Toyoda that it seemed that the matter of the preliminary 
conversations had been entrusted to Secretary Hull. He said that in such 
conversations the United States would want to be advised of the peace 
terms Japan would propose between Japan and China and would refuse to 
act as intermediary unless the terms were fair and just; therefore, he 
said, it would be necessary to outline the terms in advance of the 
proposed "leaders conference." He also reported that the United States 
wanted to arrange matters with Britain, China, and the Netherlands in 
advance of the proposed conference, so that those countries would not 
get the impression the United States was trading them off (ex. 1, p. 
27). Two days later, Ambassador Nomura cabled that there were 
"considerable signs of anticipation of a Japanese-U. S. Conference" at a 
recent United States Cabinet meeting and that "there is no mistaking the 
fact that the President is prepared to attend the meeting if the 
preliminary arrangements can be made" (ex. 1, p. 28). On September 22 
(Washington time), he cabled a long report to the Foreign Minister 
concerning conditions and attitudes in the United States generally. His 
report concluded with the following estimate:

"Finally, though the United States Government does not wish to 
compromise with Japan at the expense of China, should Japan give up 
forceful aggressions, Japanese-American trade relations could be 
restored, and the United States would even go so far as to render 
economic assistance to Japan (ex. 1, p. 31)."

In the meantime, in Tokyo at Joint Conferences on September 6 and 13 
(Japan time), the Japanese Government had determined the basic peace 
terms which it was prepared to offer to China (ex. 132-A, item D). A 
document containing those terms (Annex C attached hereto) was handed to 
Secretary Hull by Ambassador Nomura on September 23 (Washington time), 
having been communicated by the Foreign Minister to Ambassador Grew in 
Tokyo on September 22 (Japan time) (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 631-633). 
During this conference with Secretary Hull, Ambassador Nomura reiterated 
the desire of his Government to have the Roosevelt-Konoye meeting take 
place at the earliest possible opportunity. He told the Secretary that 
the several documents which he had now presented were a full expression 
of everything the Japanese Government desired to say, and that anything 
further pertaining to the Tripartite Pact might best be left to the 
proposed meeting of the heads of the two Governments (ex. 29, vol. II, 
pp. 634-635). However, on September 27 (Washington time), he delivered 
to Secretary Hull a further document (Annex D attached hereto), which 
had been prepared in the form, and along the lines, of the American 
proposals of June 21 (Washington time) and had been approved at a Joint 
Conference on September 20 (Japan time). The new document, it was said, 
incorporated all that the Japanese Government had communicated to the 
American Government since June 21. A similar document had been delivered 
to Ambassador Grew on September 25, 1941 (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 636-641).

On September 27 (Japan time) ceremonies were held in Tokyo celebrating 
the first anniversary of the Tripartite Pact. That day Foreign Minister 
Toyoda requested Ambassador Grew to call on him, and asked the 
Ambassador to convey to President Roosevelt, through Secretary Hull, the 
anxiety of Premier Konoye and the entire Cabinet

Page 314             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

lest the proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting might be indefinitely 
delayed, stating that all preparations had been made by the Japanese 
Government. During this conference he described to Ambassador Grew in 
considerable detail his Government's position regarding the 
conversations (ex. 29, vol. I1, pp. 641-645). The Foreign Minister 
cabled his remarks to Ambassador Nomura, saying that "in view of 
internal and external circumstances in our country, we cannot keep 
postponing matters forever" (ex. 1, p. 33). Ambassador Nomura 
communicated the gist of the Foreign Minister's remarks to Secretary 
Hull on September 29 (Washington time). He said that while he was well 
aware of the United States Government's position and had communicated it 
to Tokyo, nevertheless, his Government had instructed him to press for 
an answer to the Japanese proposal. AS his personal opinion, he judged 
that if nothing came of the proposal for a meeting between the heads of 
the two Governments, it might be difficult for Premier Konoye to retain 
his position and that he then would be likely to be succeeded by a less 
moderate leader (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 652).

[**AMBASSADOR GREW SUPPORTS THE PROPOSED "LEADERS CONFERENCE"**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(August-September 1941)**

In Tokyo Ambassador Grew had reached the conclusion that if the 
Roosevelt-Konoye meeting should not be held, or if it should be long 
delayed, the Konoye Cabinet might fall. He had first learned of the 
proposed "leaders conference" at a meeting with Foreign Minister Toyoda 
on August 18 (Japan time.) During the Foreign Minister's lengthy remarks 
concerning the proposed meeting, Ambassador Grew had commented on 
Japan's progressive southward advance and the fact that, in spite of all 
peaceful assurances, the United States Government in the light of the 
steps Japan had taken "could only be guided by facts and actions and not 
words." Notwithstanding the doubts reflected in these statements, at the 
conclusion of the Foreign Minister's remarks Ambassador Grew had said 
"that in the interests of peace, (he) would give the proposal (for a 
meeting) his own. Personal support" (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 559-564). 
Ambassador Grew reported the Foreign Minister's remarks to Secretary 
Hull the following day in a message which included the following, as 
paraphrased in the State Department:

"that naturally he is not aware of the reaction President Roosevelt will 
have to the proposal made today orally by the Japanese Minister for 
Foreign Affairs. The Ambassador urges, however, with all the force at 
his command, for the sake of avoiding the obviously growing possibility 
of an utterly futile war between Japan and the United States, that this 
Japanese proposal not be turned aside without very prayerful 
consideration. Not only is the proposal unprecedented in Japanese 
history, but it is an indication that Japanese intransigence is not 
crystallized completely owing to the fact that the proposal has the 
approval of the Emperor and the highest authorities in the land. The 
good which may flow from a meeting between Prince Konoye and President 
Roosevelt is incalculable. The opportunity is here presented, the 
Ambassador ventures to believe, for an act of the highest statesmanship, 
such as the recent meeting of President Roosevelt with Prime Minister 
Churchill at sea, with the possible overcoming thereby of apparently 
insurmountable obstacles to peace hereafter in the Pacific (ex. 29, vol. 
II, p. 565)."

A month later, in a personal letter dated September 22 (Japan time) to 
President Roosevelt, which apparently did not, however, reach

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        Page 315

Washington until after the fall of the Konoye Cabinet, he referred to 
his conversations with Premier Konoye "who," he said-

"in the face of bitter antagonism from extremist and pro-Axis elements 
in the country is courageously working for an improvement in Japan's 
relations with the United States. He bears the heavy responsibility for 
having allowed our relations to come to such a pass and he no doubt now 
sees the handwriting on the wall and realizes that Japan has nothing to 
hope for from the Tripartite Pact and must shift her orientation of 
policy if she is to avoid disaster; but whatever the incentive that has 
led to his present efforts, I am convinced that he now means business 
and will go as far as is possible, without incurring open rebellion in 
Japan, to reach a reasonable understanding with us. In spite of all the 
evidence of Japan's bad faith in times past in failing to live up to her 
commitments, I believe that there is a better chance of the present 
Government implementing whatever commitments it may now undertake than 
has been the case in recent years. It seems to me highly unlikely that 
this chance will come again or that any Japanese statesman other than 
Prince Konoye could succeed in controlling the military extremists in 
carrying through a policy which they, in their ignorance of 
international affairs and economic laws, resent and oppose. The 
alternative to reaching a settlement now would be the greatly increased 
probability of war * * *. I therefore most earnestly hope that we can 
come to terms, even if we must take on trust, at least to some degree, 
the continued good faith and ability of the present Government fully to 
implement those terms." (Ex. 178.)"

A week later, on September 29 (Japan time), following his meeting with 
Foreign Minister Toyoda on September 27 referred to above, Ambassador 
Grew cabled a long report to Secretary Hull, in which "in all deference 
to the much broader field of view of President Roosevelt and Secretary 
Hull and in full awareness that the Ambassador's approach to the matter 
is limited to the viewpoint of the American Embassy in Japan," he stated 
at length his appraisal of the existing situation (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 
645-650). The most significant part of this report was the following, as 
paraphrased in the State Department:

"8. Should the United States expect or await agreement by the Japanese 
Government, in the present preliminary conversations, to clear-cut 
commitments which will satisfy the United States Government both as to 
principle and as to concrete detail, almost certainly the conversations 
will drag along indefinitely and unproductively until the Konoye Cabinet 
and its supporting elements desiring *rapprochement* with the United 
States will come to the conclusion that the outlook for an agreement is 
hopeless and that the United States Government is only playing for time. 
If the abnormal sensitiveness of Japan and the abnormal effects of loss 
of face are considered, in such a situation Japanese reaction may and 
probably will be serious. This will result in the Konoye Government's 
being discredited and in a revulsion of anti-American feeling, and this 
may and probably will lead to unbridled acts. The eventual cost of these 
will not be reckoned, and their nature is likely to inflame Americans, 
while reprisal and counter-reprisal measures will bring about a 
situation in which it will be difficult to avoid war.  *The logical 
outcome of this will be the downfall of the Konoye Cabinet and the 
formation of a military dictatorship which will lack either the 
disposition or the temperament to avoid colliding head-on with the 
United States.* There is a question that such a situation may prove to 
be more serious even than the failure to produce a entirely satisfactory 
agreement through the proposed meeting between President Roosevelt and 
Prince Konoye, should it take place as planned (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 
648-649)."

In connection with Ambassador Grew's reference to the "viewpoint of the 
American Embassy in Japan," in his testimony before the Committee he 
said:

"I may say here that we in our Embassy in Tokyo did not have access to 
any of the secret documents or intercepted telegrams. We didn't even 
know that they existed (tr. 1481)."

Page 316             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

And again:

"I just want to say once more everything I have said today represents 
the point of view of one spot, our Embassy in Tokyo, and we were 
deprived of a great deal of the information which was available to the 
President and Mr. Hull. We had none of the secret intercepts or 
telegrams, we had none of the documents that have come into the State 
Department from time to time documents of a secret nature, so of course 
the President and Mr. Hull saw the picture with a great deal more 
information than we had available to us (tr. 1903-1904)."

[**JAPAN DETERMINES ITS MINIMUM DEMANDS AND ITS MAXIMUM CONCESSIONS IN THE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(September 6, 1941)**

It is now known that in the meantime, in Tokyo far-reaching decisions 
had been made. The "Policy of the Imperial Government" which was decided 
upon at the Imperial Conference on July 2 (Japan time) had provided that 
in carrying out a southward advance the Government would not be deterred 
"by the possibility of being involved in a war with England and 
America." It had also been decided at that conference that in carrying 
out Japan's preparations for war with Russia and in the use of Japan's 
military strength against Russia in case the German-Soviet war "should 
develop to our advantage,"

"all plans, especially the use of armed forces, will be carried out in 
such a way as to place no serious obstacles *in the path of our basic 
military preparations for a war with England and America* (ex. 173, 
Konoye Memoirs, pp. 70-71)."

When the Japanese advance into southern French Indochina during the 
latter part of July had brought about the termination of the 
conversations between Secretary Hull and Ambassador Nomura and the 
American freezing order, Premier Konoye had come forward early in August 
with his proposal for a "leaders conference" between President Roosevelt 
and himself. While this proposal had received the support of the 
Japanese Navy, it had been supported by the Japanese Army only provided 
the Premier intended 

"*to carry out a war against America if the President of the United 
States still failed to comprehend the true intentions of the Empire* 
(ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 31).

As tension increased in Tokyo, the Japanese Army General Staff began 
advocating the immediate breaking off of negotiations with the United 
States and the opening of Japanese-American hostilities, and Premier 
Konoye discussed this question at innumerable conferences with the Army 
and Navy Ministers during the latter part of August (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, p. 39-40).

It is now known that during those conferences there were developed 
"Plans for the Prosecution of the Policy of the Imperial Government" 
which set forth the manner in which the Government would proceed in 
carrying out the plans "for the southern territories" decided upon at 
the Imperial Conference on July 2 (Japan time). Premier Konoye submitted 
these new "Plans" to the Emperor informally on September ,5 (Japan time) 
in the form of an agenda for an Imperial Conference the next day, as 
follows:

"1. Determined not to be deterred by the possibility of being involved 
in a war with America (and England and Holland), in order to secure our 
national existence, *we will proceed with war preparations so that they 
be completed approximately toward the end of October*."

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK                Page 317

"2. At the same time, *we will endeavor by every possible diplomatic 
means to have our demands agreed to by America and England*. Japan's 
minimum demands in these negotiations with America (and England), 
together with the Empire's maximum concessions are embodied in the 
attached document.
"3. *If by the early part of October there is no reasonable hope of 
having our demands agreed to in the diplomatic negotiations mentioned 
above, we will immediately make up our minds to get ready for war 
against America (and England and Holland).*
"Policies with reference to countries other than those in the southern 
territories will be carried out in harmony with the plans already laid. 
Special effort will be made to prevent America and Soviet Russia from 
forming a united front against Japan (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 77)."

According to Premier Konoye, on examining the "Plans", Emperor Hirohito 
was impressed by the fact that the document seemed "to give precedence 
to war over diplomatic activities." The Premier explained that the order 
of business in the agenda did not indicate any differences in degree of 
importance. The Emperor then summoned the Chiefs of the Army and Navy 
General Staffs. When they came, he questioned them sharply concerning 
the probable length of hostilities in the event of a Japanese-American 
conflict, and then asked whether it was not true that both of them "were 
for giving precedence to diplomacy." Both answered in the affirmative 
(ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs pp. 40-41) .

At the Imperial Conference the next day, September 6 (Japan time) the 
"Plans" were decided upon and approved (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 40). 
However, at the Conference first the President of the Privy Council and 
then Emperor Hirohito asked for a clarification of the views of the 
Government as to whether the emphasis was not being placed by the 
Government upon war rather than diplomacy. When none of the Supreme 
Command replied, and only the Navy Minister representing the Government, 
the Emperor is reported to have rebuked the Supreme Command by 
indicating that he was striving for international peace. After this the 
Chief of the Navy General Staff assured the Emperor that the Chiefs of 
the Supreme Command were conscious of the importance of diplomacy, and 
"advocated a resort to armed force only when there seemed no other way 
out."  According to Premier Konoye, the Conference adjourned "in an 
atmosphere of unprecedented tenseness" (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 41).

Japan's "minimum demands" in the negotiations with America and England, 
as approved at the Imperial Conference on September 6 (Japan time), were 
as follows, according to Premier Konoye's memoirs:

"1. America and England would be required to agree not to intervene in, 
or obstruct, the settlement by Japan of the "China Incident", to close 
the Burma Road, and to cease all aid of any kind to China.
"2. America and England would be required to agree to take no action in 
the Far East which offered a threat to the Japanese Empire, and not to 
establish military bases in Thailand, the Netherlands East Indies, 
China, or Far Eastern Soviet Russia or increase their existing Far 
Eastern military forces over their present strength. In this connection 
Japan would not consider any demands 'for the liquidation of Japan's 
special relations with French Indo-China'."
"3. America and England would be required to agree to cooperate with 
Japan in her attempt to obtain needed raw materials; to restore trade 
relations with Japan and "furnish her with the

Page 318             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"raw materials she needs" from British and American territories in the 
Southwest Pacific; and to assist Japan in establishing close economic 
relations with Thai and the Netherlands East Indies (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, appendix V, pp. 77-78)."

The "maximum concessions" Japan was prepared to make in return for 
agreement to her "minimum demands" were as follows:

"1. Japan would not use French Indochina as a base for operations 
against any neighboring countries 'with the exception of China'.
"2. Japan would be prepared to withdraw her troops from French Indochina 
'as soon as a just peace is established in the Far East'."
"3. Japan would be prepared to guarantee the neutrality of the 
Philippine Islands (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, appendix V, p. 78). In 
other words in an effort to take all possible advantage of the world 
situation, the Japanese Government (determined at the Imperial 
Conference on September 6 (Japan time) that the least Japan would accept 
from America and England in return for the withdrawal of her troops from 
French Indochina would be the agreement of America and England to cease 
all aid to China, to accept a military and naval status in the Far East 
inferior to Japan, and to furnish all possible material aid to Japan. 
Furthermore, Japan did not intend to perform her part of the "bargain" 
until after "a just peace" had been established in the Far East. From 
the Japanese standpoint, this latter qualification meant after the 
settlement of the "China Incident" by Japan on her own terms. The 
substance of these "minimum demands" was contained in the ultimatum 
which the Japanese Government later delivered to the United States on 
November 20 (Washington time).

The evening of the same day, September 6 (Japan time), Premier Konoye, 
with the knowledge and approval of the Japanese Ministers of War, Navy, 
and Foreign Affairs met with Ambassador Grew at a private house under 
conditions of extraordinary secrecy. In his notes of the meeting, 
Ambassador Grew wrote that the Premier had requested that his statements 
be transmitted personally to President Roosevelt in the belief that they 
might amplify and clarify the approach which he had made through 
Ambassador Nomura. Ambassador Grew noted that the Premier and, 
consequently, the Government of Japan, conclusively and wholeheartedly 
agreed with the four principles put forward by Secretary Hull as a basis 
for the rehabilitation of Japanese-American relations. [1] In his 
memoirs, however, Prince Konoye stated that when at this meeting 
Ambassador Grew asked for his views regarding Secretary Hull's four 
principles he said "that they were splendid as principles but when it 
came down to actual application a variety of problems arose" and that it 
was in order to solve those very problems that he deemed it necessary to 
hold the meeting with President Roosevelt (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 
42). Ambassador Grew noted that Premier Konoye had strongly urged that 
no better opportunity for the improvement of Japanese-American relations 
would be presented, and that the Premier had 

[1] In a memorandum dated October 7 (Japan time) recording a conference 
which he had on that date with the Japanese Foreign Minister, Ambassador 
Grew noted that the Foreign Minister told him that Ambassador Nomura had 
been instructed to inform Secretary Hull that the statement in the 
United States memorandum of October 2 (Washington time) (*see infra*) 
that Premier Konoye "fully subscribed" to the four principles should be 
modified to indicate that the Premier subscribed "in principle" (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 664).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        Page 319

said that he had the full support of the responsible chiefs of the Army 
and Navy, who were already choosing their delegates to the proposed 
conference. Premier Konoye had said, he noted, that he could control any 
opposition from within the Government, and that he was determined to 
spare no effort, despite all elements and factors opposing him to crown 
his present endeavors with success. The Ambassador wrote that during the 
conversation he had outlined in general terms-

"the bitter lessons of the past to our Government as the result of the 
failure of the Japanese Government to honor the promises given to me by 
former Japanese Ministers for Foreign Affairs apparently in all 
sincerity-"

and had stated that, as the result-

"the Government of the United States had at long last concluded that it 
must place its reliance on actions and facts and not on Japanese 
promises or assurances."

He noted that Premier Konoye had expressed the earnest hope that in view 
of the present internal situation in Japan the projected meeting with 
the President could be arranged "with the least possible delay" (ex. 29, 
vol. II, pp. 604-606).

[**THE UNITED STATES ASKS JAPAN TO CLARIFY ITS NEW PROPOSALS**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(October 2, 1941)**

Thus, as September ended the Japanese Government, on the one hand, was 
vigorously asserting the urgent and pressing need to go forward with the 
proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting at the earliest possible moment. It is 
now known that this desire for haste reflected the decision of the 
Imperial Conference on September 6 (Japan time) that-

"*If by the early part of October* there is no reasonable hope of having 
our demands agreed to in the diplomatic negotiations * * *, we will 
immediately make up our minds to get ready for war against America (and 
England and Holland) (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 77)."

On the other hand, the United States Government, knowing nothing of 
these plans but nonetheless skeptical of Japan's peaceful intentions, 
was insisting that before the proposed Roosevelt-Konoye meeting should 
take place the two Governments should preliminary agree upon the 
fundamental matters under consideration when the conversations were 
broken off in July after the Japanese military occupation of southern 
French Indochina. This latter position had been taken in the reply to 
Premier Konoye which President Roosevelt handed to Ambassador Nomura on 
September 3, and had been repeated many times by Secretary Hull in his 
subsequent conversations with the Ambassador.

The Committee has obtained from the files of President Roosevelt a 
memorandum in Secretary Hull's handwriting, on White House stationery, 
apparently written by the Secretary for the President before the latter 
left Washington for Hyde Park about September 25 (Washington time) (ex. 
179; ex. 1, p. 40). This memorandum summarized Secretary Hull's views at 
the time:

"My suggestion on Jap situation-for you to read later*."  

"C.H.
"When the Jap Prime Minister requested a meeting with you, he indicated 
a fairly basic program in generalities, but left open such questions as 
getting troops out of China, Tripartite Pact, nondiscrimination in trade 
in Pacific."

Page 320             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"We indicated desire for meeting, but suggested first an agreement in 
principle on the vital questions left open, so as to insure the success 
of the conference.

"Soon thereafter, the Japs narrowed their position on these basic 
questions, and now continue to urge the meeting at Juneau.

"My suggestion is to recite their more liberal attitude when they first 
sought the meeting with you, with their much narrowed position *now*, 
and earnestly ask if they cannot go back to their original liberal 
attitude so we can start discussions again on agreement in principle 
before the meeting, and reemphasizing your desire for a meeting (ex. 
179). [Italics in original.]"

President Roosevelt sent his comments to Secretary Hull from Hyde Park 
in the following memorandum dated September 28 (Washington time):

              "MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE

"I wholly agree with your penciled note-to recite the more liberal 
original attitude of the Japanese when they first sought the meeting, 
point out their much narrowed position now, earnestly ask if they cannot 
go back to their original attitude, start discussions again on agreement 
in principle, and reemphasize my hope for a meeting.
"F. D. R.
"(Ex. 179.)"

On October 2 (Washington time), Secretary Hull handed to Ambassador 
Nomura the United States' reply to the Japanese Government's proposals 
of September 6 and its subsequent statements of September 23 (Annex c) 
and September 27 (Annex D). This reply briefly reviewed the course of 
the conversations thus far, pointing out that developments from early 
August up to September 6 had seemed to justify the United States 
Government in concluding that the Japanese Government might be expected 
to adhere to and to give practical application to a broad progressive 
program covering the entire Pacific area. The reply continued:

"It was therefore a source of disappointment to the Government of the 
United States that the proposals of the Japanese Government presented by 
the Japanese Ambassador on September 6, 1941, which the Japanese 
Government apparently intended should constitute a concrete basis for 
discussions, appeared to disclose divergence in the concepts of the two 
Governments. That is to say, those proposals and the subsequent 
explanatory statements made in regard thereto serve, in the opinion of 
this Government, to narrow and restrict not only the application of the 
principles upon which our informal conversations already referred to had 
been based but also the various assurances given by the Japanese 
Government of its desire to move along with the United States in putting 
into operation a broad program looking to the establishment and 
maintenance of peace and stability in the entire Pacific area (ex. 29, 
vol. II, pp. 658-659)."

It was then noted that the Japanese assurances of peaceful intent 
continued to be qualified by phrases the need for which was not readily 
apparent; that in the economic sphere the new proposals were restricted 
to the countries of the Southwest Pacific area, rather than the entire 
Pacific area, as before; and that a clear-cut manifestation of Japan's 
intention in regard to the withdrawal of Japanese troops from China and 
French Indochina would be most helpful in making known Japan's peaceful 
intentions, as would additional clarification of the Japanese 
Government's position with respect to the European war. The reply 
continued by stating that from what the Japanese Government had so far 
indicated in regard to its purposes, the United States Government had 
derived the impression that Japan had in mind a program by which the 
liberal and progressive principles adhered to by the United States would 
be circumscribed in their application by qualifications and exceptions. 
The Japanese Government was

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK                          Page 321

then asked whether, under such circumstances, it believed the proposed 
Roosevelt-Konoye meeting would be likely to contribute to the high 
purposes "which we have mutually had in mind." The reply concluded by 
stating that it was the belief of the United States Government that 
renewed consideration of the fundamental principles which it had long 
advocated would aid in reaching a meeting of minds in regard to the 
essential questions on which agreement was sought and would thus lay a 
firm foundation for the proposed meeting, and that it was the 
President's earnest hope that a discussion of the fundamental questions 
might be so developed that the meeting could be held (ex. 29, vol. II, 
pp. 656-661). After reading the reply, Ambassador Nomura commented that 
he thought his Government would be disappointed because of its very 
earnest desire to hold the meeting, but that in any case he would 
transmit it to his Government, which he did the same day (ex. 29, vol. 
II, p. 655; ex. 1, p. 50). He added that he was convinced that the 
Japanese Government was entirely sincere in this matter and had no 
ulterior purpose. He said, however, that in view of the difficulties of 
the internal situation in Japan, he did not think his Government could 
go any further at this time (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 655).

In a memorandum bearing the same date, October 2 (Washington time), 
which was distributed to President Roosevelt and Secretary Hull in 
addition to Secretary Stimson, General Marshall and other high officers 
in the War Department, Colonel Hayes A. Kronor, Acting Assistant Chief 
of Staff, G-2, reached the following conclusions:

"10. This Division is of the opinion that neither a conference of 
leaders nor economic concessions at this point would be of any material 
advantage to the United States unless a definite commitment to withdraw 
from the Axis were obtained prior to the conference. * * *

"11. Since it is highly improbable that this condition can be met by the 
Japanese Government at the present time our course lies straight before 
us. This Division still believes that forceful diplomacy vis-a-vis 
Japan, including the application of ever increasing military and 
economic pressure on our part, offers the best chance of gaining time, 
the best possibility of preventing the spread of hostilities in the 
Pacific Area, and the best hope of the eventual disruption of the 
Tripartite Pact.  The exercise of increasingly strong "power diplomacy" 
by the United States is still clearly indicated (ex. 33)."

The following undated note, in Secretary Stimson's handwriting, appears 
at the end of his copy of the above memorandum:

"Quite independently I have reached similar conclusions and hold them 
strongly.  I believe however that during the next three months while we 
are rearming the Philippines great care must be exercised to avoid an 
explosion by the Japanese Army. Put concretely this means, that while I 
approve of stringing out negotiations during that period, they should 
not be allowed to ripen into a personal conference between the President 
and P. M. [1] I greatly fear that such a conference if actually held 
would produce concessions which would be highly dangerous to our vitally 
important relations with China (ex. 33)."

Admiral Stark testified before the Committee that he neither opposed or 
approved the proposal for a meeting between President Roosevelt and 
Premier Konoye. He continued:

"I do recall when it was discussed my own personal opinion was that the 
President and Mr. Hull were right in not just going out to discuss 
something with the Prime Minister without some preliminary agreement 
regarding the agenda and something which might be accomplished (tr. 
6308).

[1] Prime Minister Konoye.

Page 322             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

In his testimony before the Committee, Secretary Hull set forth at 
length the considerations which were taken into account in determining 
the position to be taken by the United States Government regarding the 
proposed "leaders conference" (tr. 1120-1124).

The next day, October 3 (Washington time), after he had forwarded the 
United States reply to Tokyo, Ambassador Nomura cabled Foreign Minister 
Toyoda a long report on the situation in the United States as he saw it. 
His report began by stating-

"although there is a feeling that the Japanese-U. S. Talks have finally 
reached a deadlock, we do not believe that it should be considered as an 
absolutely hopeless situation. We are of the impression that the United 
States worded their memorandum in such a way as to permit a ray of hope 
to penetrate through (ex. 1, p. 51-52)."

He expressed the view that an "understanding" between Japan and the 
United States hinged on one point, the problem of the evacuation of the 
Japanese troops from China (ex. 1, p. 53).

During the next 2 weeks the Japanese Foreign Office made repeated 
efforts both in Washington and in Tokyo to have the United States 
Government state what further assurances it desired from the Japanese 
Government, emphasizing that the position of Premier Konoye was daily 
growing more difficult. Also during this period, Ambassador Nomura 
appears to have incurred the displeasure of Foreign Minister Toyoda. In 
a message to the Foreign Minister on October 8 (Washington time), the 
Ambassador indicated that he agreed with many of Secretary Hull's 
criticisms of the Japanese proposals of September 6, which the Foreign 
Office had prepared. He expressed the opinion that-

"In our proposal of the 6th and in the explanation thereof, not only did 
we limit them and narrow what we had discussed in our informal 
conversations thus far, but we also curtailed extremely the guarantees 
we offered concerning the aforementioned principles. We equivocated 
concerning guarantees that we would not engage in armed aggression. We 
limited the area to which the principle of nondiscriminatory treatment 
would apply in the Pacific, and on the excuse that China was 
geographically near to us, we limited the very principle itself. On the 
question of stationing and evacuating troops in and from China 
(including French Indo-China), the Americans are making some demands 
which we in principle have objections to. Moreover, they figure that 
they must be much surer of our attitude toward the three-power pact. 
These points you probably already know (ex. 1, p. 59)."

As the result of repeated instructions from the Foreign Minister to 
obtain from Secretary Hull an expression of his views regarding the 
three major points of difference between the two Governments, i. e., 
which had developed in the earlier conversations, namely, (1) the 
withdrawal of troops from China, (2) Japan's obligations under the 
Tripartite Pact, and (3) nondiscrimination in international trade, 
Ambassador Nomura called on Secretary Hull on October 9 (Washington 
time) (vol. II, pp. 670 672). The Ambassador's report of this meeting 
(ex. 1, p. 61) was plainly unsatisfactory to Foreign Minister Toyoda, 
for on October 10 (Japan time) the Foreign Minister cabled Ambassador 
Nomura that he was well aware of the Ambassador's opinions and that what 
he wanted was "the opinions of the American officials and none other." 
Saying that "slowly but surely the question of these negotiations has 
reached the decisive stage," and that he was doing his utmost "to bring 
about a decision on them and the situation does not permit of this 
senseless procrastination," he told Ambassador Nomura:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 323

"You do not tell me whether or not we have a chance to proceed with 
these parleys. You do not tell me how Hull answers. You do not tell me 
anything else I need to know for my future consideration. You must wire 
me in detail and immediately the minutes of these conversations, what 
they say and the prospect for negotiations. Hereafter, when you 
interview Hull or the President of the United States, please take 
Wakasugi or Iguchi with you and please send me without delay the 
complete minutes of what transpires (ex. 1, p. 63)."

On the same afternoon, October 10 (Japan time), Foreign Minister Toyoda 
requested Ambassador Grew to call on him, and during their conversation 
told Ambassador Grew that Ambassador Nomura had been "unable to provide 
the information" he had asked for and that-

"a week of very valuable time had been wasted in an endeavor to elicit 
through the Japanese Ambassador information which, had it been received, 
would have measurably accelerated the present conversations (ex. 30, p. 
454)."

The Foreign Minister told Ambassador Grew that in order to prevent 
further delay he was requesting the Ambassador to ask his Government to 
reply to the following question:

"The Government of Japan has submitted to the Government of the United 
States with reference to certain questions proposals which are 
apparently not satisfactory to the Government of the United States. Will 
the American Government now set forth to the Japanese Government for its 
consideration the undertakings to be assumed by the Japanese Government 
which would be satisfactory to the American Government (ex. 29, vol. II, 
p. 678)?"

 He continued by saying that since-

"he had the impression that the Japanese Ambassador in Washington was 
apparently very fatigued, serious consideration was being given to the 
question of sending to Washington a diplomat of wide experience to 
assist the Ambassador in carrying on the present conversations. Admiral 
Toyoda said he had in mind a high-ranking diplomatic official with the 
personal rank of Ambassador, but he had not yet approached the official 
in question and was therefore uncertain as to whether he would agree to 
undertake to accept the mission. It would be of great assistance to the 
Minister to ascertain whether the Government of the United States, in 
the event that it was decided to send the official in question to 
Washington, would be prepared to make available a reservation for him on 
the airplane from Manila to San Francisco. Admiral Toyoda said that the 
official in question would not be accredited to the Government of the 
United-States but would be temporarily and unofficially attached to the 
Japanese Embassy in Washington. I told the Foreign Minister that I would 
transmit his inquiry to my Government.

"In concluding the conversation, the Minister several times stressed to 
me, in view of the importance of the time factor, the necessity of 
expediting the progress of the conversations (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 679)."

Ambassador Nomura replied to Foreign Minister Toyoda's message of 
October 10 (Japan time) on the same date (Washington time):

"What they want is the maintenance of peace in the Pacific, and they 
claim that our policy is semipacific and semiaggressive. They say that 
our proposal of September 6 diverged greatly from preceding statements 
and that it will be out of the question to agree on any preparatory 
talks on the basis of such a proposal. In addition to the three matters 
mentioned in your message, it seems that there are many other 
objections. I have repeatedly asked them to clarify what I do not 
understand, but they won't answer. At any rate, however, I feel safe at 
least in saying that they are demanding that we compromise in accordance 
with the lines laid down in their memorandum of October 2. *I am sure 
that there is not the slightest chance on earth of them featuring a 
conference of leaders so long as we do not make that compromise.*

"In other words, they are not budging an inch from the attitude they 
have always taken; however, they act as if they were ready to consider 
at any time any plan of ours which would meet the specifications of 
their answer of the 2nd (ex. I, p. 63).

On October 13 (Japan time) Foreign Minister Toyoda cabled instructions 
to the Counselor of the Japanese Embassy in Washington, 

Page 324                PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Mr. Wakasugi, who had just returned to Washington after 2 weeks in 
Japan, to call upon Under Secretary Welles. In his message, the Foreign 
Minister said that he was particularly anxious to be advised as soon as 
possible as to whether he could assume that the United States had no 
particular disagreements other than the three major points and whether 
the United States would submit a counterproposal to the Japanese 
proposals of September 27. He said:

"The situation at home is fast approaching a crisis, and it is becoming 
absolutely essential that the two leaders meet if any adjustment of 
Japanese-U S relations is to be accomplished (ex 1, p 64)."

Counselor Wakasugi talked with Under Secretary Welles on the afternoon 
of October 13 (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 680-686). Admiral Nomura sent two 
reports of that meeting to Tokyo, on the same day (ex. 1, pp. 66-68). 
His first report stated that so far as Mr. Welles knew there were no 
obstacles to the materialization of the leaders' conference other than 
the three major points, though there might be one or two others, and 
that the United States had no intention of submitting any 
counterproposal other than those of June 21 and October 2. His second 
report was a more detailed description of the Welles-Wakasugi meeting. 
In reply, the Foreign Minister said that these reports had "clarified 
many points" and "that there is no need for us to make any further move 
until the other side decides that it is impossible to clarify the 
concrete proposal any further" (ex. 1, pp. 69-70).

In Tokyo, the Japanese Government also made frequent overtures to the 
officials at the American Embassy. Thus, early on October 7 (Japan 
time), the Premier's private secretary, Mr. Ushiba, called on Counselor 
Dooman (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 662-663) and complained that the failure of 
the preliminary conversations to make any progress had made the 
Premier's position difficult. He concluded his remarks with the comment 
that-

"the only thing left for the Japanese Government was to ask the American 
Government to give specifications with regard to the character of the 
undertakings which Japan was desired to give, and that if a clear-cut 
reply as not forthcoming to bring the conversations to a close (ex 29, 
vol. II, p 663)."

This meeting appears to have been preliminary to a meeting the same 
morning between Ambassador Grew and the Foreign Minister, at the 
latter's request. At that meeting, as on the occasion of subsequent 
calls by Mr. Terasaki on Counselor Dooman and Ambassador Grew on October 
8 and 9, the Japanese endeavored to obtain comments on the American 
reply of October 2. It was again indicated that the Japanese Government 
wished to know more definitely what undertakings the United States 
Government wanted it to give. These efforts culminated in Foreign 
Minister Toyoda's request of Ambassador Grew on October 10 that he 
submit that question to Secretary Hull. On that occasion Ambassador Grew 
commented at length on the opinion he had conveyed the day before to the 
Foreign Minister, that the reports he had received of plans to dispatch 
additional Japanese troops to Indochina in substantial numbers "could 
not but seriously and adversely affect these conversations (ex. 29, vol. 
II, p. 679).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        Page 325

[**GERMANY DEMANDS THAT JAPAN WARN THE UNITED STATES THAT WAR BETWEEN GERMANY AND ITALY AND THE UNITED STATES WOULD LEAD TO WAR BETWEEN JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES PURSUANT TO THE TRIPARTITE PACT**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(October 1941)**

The intercepted Japanese messages show that during the latter part of 
September and the early part of October both the German and Italian 
Ambassadors sought to obtain from Foreign Minister Toyoda confidential 
information regarding the Japanese-American conversations. In contrast 
with the policy followed by his predecessor, Foreign Minister Matsuoka, 
from whom the Axis partners had obtained such information, Foreign 
Minister Toyoda declined to give them any (ex. 1, p. 71).

Failing in this, after the German attacks on American merchant vessels 
and the movement in the United States for revision of the Neutrality 
Act, the Germans took a stronger line. This became known to the United 
States not only from intercepted messages but also through statements 
made by the Japanese Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Amau, to 
Ambassador Grew in Tokyo on October 15 (Japan time). Mr. Amau told 
Ambassador Grew-

"that the German Government is insistently pressing for the issuance of 
a statement by the Japanese Government in confirmation of the 
interpretation given to the Tripartite Pact by Mr. Matsuoka, to the 
effect that Japan will declare war on they United States in the event of 
war occurring between Germany and the United States. As a reply, 
although it has not yet been decided when or whether such reply will be 
rendered to the German Government, the Japanese Government is 
considering a formula of a noncommittal nature to the effect that 
maintenance of peace in the Pacific is envisaged in the Tripartite Pact 
and that the attention of the American Government has been sought for 
its earnest consideration of Japan's obligations under the Pact (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 686)."

The following day, however, Foreign Minister Toyoda cabled Ambassador 
Nomura that early in October-

"the German authorities demanded that the Japanese Government submit to 
the American Government a message to the effect that the Japanese 
Government observes that if the ROOSEVELT Administration continues to 
attack the Axis Powers increasingly, a belligerent situation would 
inevitably arise between Germany and Italy, on the one hand, and the 
United States, on the other, and this would provide the reasons for the 
convocation of the duties envisioned in the Three Power agreement and 
might lead Japan to join immediately the war in opposition to the United 
States. We have not as yet submitted this message because, in view of 
the Japanese-American negotiations, we found it necessary to consider 
carefully the proper timing as well as wording of the message. The 
German authorities have been repeatedly making the same request, and 
there are reasons which do not permit this matter to be postponed any 
longer. While Japan, on the one hand, finds it necessary to do something 
in the way of carrying out the duties placed upon her by the Three Power 
Alliance she had concluded with Germany, on the other hand, she is 
desirous of making a success of the Japanese-American negotiations. 
Under the circumstances, we can do no other than to warn the United 
States at an appropriate moment in such words as are given in my 
separate telegram #672 and as would not affect the Japanese-American 
negotiations in one way or another. This message is a secret between me 
and you (ex. 1, p. 71)."

The proposed "warning" to the United States sent to Ambassador Nomura in 
the Foreign Minister's separate telegram #672 was as follows:

"The Imperial Japanese Government has repeatedly affirmed to the 
American Government that the aim of the Tripartite Pact is to contribute 
toward the prevention of a further extension of the European war. 
Should, however, the

Page 326             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

recent tension in the German-American relations suffer aggravation, 
there would arise a distinct danger of a war between the two powers, a 
state of affairs over which Japan, as a signatory to the Tripartite 
Pact, naturally cannot help entertain a deep concern. Accordingly, in 
its sincere desire that not only the German American relations will 
cease further deterioration but the prevailing tension will also be 
alleviated as quickly as possible, the Japanese Government is now 
requesting the earnest consideration of the American Government (ex. 1, 
p. 71)."

Foreign Minister Toyoda never had an opportunity to select the 
"appropriate moment" for the delivery of his warning, because the next 
day Premier Konoye and his entire Cabinet resigned *en bloc*. The German 
Ambassador continued to press for action by Foreign Minister Togo; 
Admiral Toyoda's successor, but by November 11 (Japan time) when the 
Foreign Minister communicated with Ambassador Nomura concerning it, far 
more vigorous measures were contemplated by the Japanese. Foreign 
Minister Togo's reply erred on the side of understatement:

"I explained (to the German Ambassador) that there is a good chance that 
it would be more effective, under the present circumstances, for us to 
present a determined attitude rather than to merely make representations 
to the United States. It is exceedingly doubtful, I pointed out, whether 
a mere representation would bear any fruit (ex. 1, p. 117)."

[**THE KONOYE CABINET FALLS, AND AMBASSADOR NOMURA ASKS PERMISSION TO RETURN TO JAPAN**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(October 16, 1941; October 18-November 5, 1941)**

The attitude of the Japanese representatives in the conversations in 
Washington and in Tokyo during the latter part of September and the 
early part of October reflected developments within the Japanese 
Government during that period. In turn, the course of those developments 
was directly affected by the far-reaching decisions which had been made 
at the Imperial Conference on September 6 (Japan time).  As has been 
seen, it is now known that at that conference it had been decided that 
if "by the early part of October" there should be "no reasonable hope" 
of having the Japanese "demands" agreed to in the diplomatic 
negotiations-

"we will immediately make up our minds to get ready for war against 
America (and England and Holland) (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 77)."

This decision, according to Premier Konoye, had established a dead line 
"beyond which negotiations could not proceed." The Japanese Government 
"came more and more to feel that we were approaching a show-down" (ex. 
173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 43).

As Ambassador Nomura had told Secretary Hull, with the presentation of 
its new proposals of September 6, its proposals for basic peace terms 
with China on September 23, and its revision of the American proposals 
of June 91 which had been delivered to Secretary Hull on September 27, 
the Japanese Government took the position that there was nothing more 
that it desired to say and that the next move was up to the United 
States. In his memoirs, Premier Konoye criticizes the action of the 
Japanese Foreign Office in submitting three proposals during September 
without deciding that it would proceed with the September 27 plan 
"alone, in complete disregard of the plans of the past" (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, p- 46).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 327

This action, which left the Japanese intentions confused, was largely 
responsible for the fact that the United States Government, in its reply 
of October 2 (Washington time), had asked for a further clarification of 
the Japanese intentions.

It is now known that before the United States' reply of October 2 was 
received in Tokyo and as a result of the fact that the deadline set on 
September 6 was approaching at a faster rate than the conversations were 
progressing, Premier Konoye began frequent conferences with members of 
his Cabinet. He conferred on September 24 and 25 (Japan time) with the 
War Minister, Navy Minister, Foreign Minister, and President of the Navy 
Planning Board. From September 27 to October 1 (Japan time) he had 
discussions with the Navy Minister "concerning the atmosphere in his 
circle." On October 4 (Japan time), after receipt of the United States 
reply of October 2, Premier Konoye had an audience with Emperor 
Hirohito, following which there was a Joint Conference attended by the 
chiefs of the Japanese High Command. On the evening of October 5 (Japan 
time) he conferred with General Tojo, the War Minister, to whom he 
expressed the opinion "that he would continue negotiations (with the 
United States) to the very end" (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 49).

On the evening of October 7 (Japan time), General Tojo called on Premier 
Konoye and declared that the Army would find it difficult to submit to 
the withdrawal of its troops from China. In view of this attitude, on 
October 8 (Japan time) Premier Konoye conferred with the Navy Minister 
and the Foreign Minister concerning "methods of avoiding a crisis." He 
met twice with Foreign Minister Toyoda on October 10 (Japan time), the 
day on which the Foreign Minister asked Ambassador Grew to inquire from 
the United States Government what additional assurances it desired the 
Japanese Government to give. A Joint Conference was held on October 11 
(Japan time) (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 49).

On Sunday, October 12 (Japan time), Premier Konoye called a meeting 
attended by himself and the Ministers of War, Navy, and Foreign Affairs, 
together with the President of the Planning Board, which he described in 
his memoirs as "almost the last conference relative to peace or war." 
Before the meeting he had learned that the Navy, although not desiring a 
rupture in the negotiations, and wishing as much as possible to avoid 
war, nevertheless was unwilling to state this publicly, and would 
therefore leave the question of peace or war up to the Premier. At the 
meeting, according to Premier Konoye's memoirs, the Navy Minister 
stated:

"We have now indeed come to the crossroads where we must determine 
either upon peace or war. I should like to leave this decision entirely 
up to the Premier.  And, if we are to seek peace, we shall go all the 
way for peace. Thus, even if we make a few concessions, we ought to 
proceed all the way with the policy of bringing the negotiations to 
fruition. * * * If we are to have war, we must determine upon war here 
and now. Now is the time. We are now at the final moment of decision. If 
we decide that we are not to have war, I should like to have us proceed 
upon the policy that we will bring negotiations to fruition no matter 
what happens (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 50)."

In reply to this, Premier Konoye said:

"If we were to say that we must determine on war or peace here, today, I 
myself would decide on continuing the negotiations (ex. 173. Konoye 
Memoirs, p. 50)."

Page 328             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

General Tojo, the Minister of War, objected, saying:

"This decision of the Premier's is too hasty. Properly speaking, ought 
we not to determine here whether or not there is any possibility of 
bringing the negotiations to fruition? *To carry on negotiations for 
which there is no possibility for fruition, and in the end to let slip 
the time for fighting, would be a matter of the greatest consequence* 
(ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 50)."

General Tojo then asked Foreign Minister Toyoda whether he thought there 
was any possibility of bringing negotiations to fruition. In answer to 
this question, the Foreign Minister replied that the most difficult 
problem was the question of the withdrawal of troops from China. He 
continued:

"if in this regard the Army says that it will not retreat one step from 
its former assertions, then there is no hope in the negotiations. But if 
on this point the Army states that it will be all right to make 
concessions, however small they may be, then we cannot say that there is 
no hope of bringing the negotiations to fruition (ex. 173, Konoye 
Memoirs, p. 50)."

General Tojo, however, would not yield, saying:

"The problem of the stationing of troops, in itself means the life of 
the Army, and we shall not be able to make any concessions at all (ex. 
173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 50)."

According to Premier Konoye, although the conference lasted 4 hours, no 
conclusion was arrived at before the meeting adjourned.  The following 
day, October 13 (Japan time), Premier Konoye reported the situation to 
Emperor Hirohito and Marquis Kido, the Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal and 
a leader of the "senior statesmen." The next day the Premier met with 
General Tojo before the Cabinet meeting and again asked his considered 
opinion concerning the problem of the stationing of troops in China, 
saying that he had a very great responsibility for the "China Incident," 
which was still unsettled, and that he found it difficult to agree "to 
enter upon a greater war the future of which I cannot at all foresee." 
He then urged, according to his memoirs, that Japan "ought to give in 
for a time, grant to the United States the formality of withdrawing 
troops, and save ourselves from the crisis of a Japanese-American war" 
(ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, P. 51).

In response to this, General Tojo declared-

"if at this time we yield to the United States, she will take steps that 
are more and more high-handed, and will probably find no place to stop. 
The problem of withdrawing troops is one, you say, of forgetting the 
honor and of seizing the fruits, but, to this, I find it difficult to 
agree from the point of view of maintaining the fighting spirit of the 
Army (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 51)."

Premier Konoye records that thus General Tojo did not move from the 
position he had taken, and the talk ended at odds. According to his 
memoirs, at the Cabinet meeting which followed, General Tojo at the 
outset "strongly and excitedly set forth the reasons why the Japanese-
American negotiations should no longer be continued."  No further 
reference to the question of continuing the negotiations was made at the 
Cabinet meeting, as none of the Cabinet ministers would answer General 
Tojo (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 51.)

That evening General Tojo is reported to have sent a message to Premier 
Konoye in which he said, in effect, that if the Navy's decision to 
entrust the question of peace or war to the Premier was due to a desire 
on the part of the Navy not to have a war, then the Imperial Conference 
on September 6 "will have been fundamentally

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 329

overturned," as the decisions reached at that conference would not have 
taken into account such an attitude on the part of the Navy. He then 
expressed the belief that the entire Cabinet should resign and "declare 
insolvent everything that has happened up to now and reconsider our 
plans once more." He said that it was very hard for him to ask the 
Premier to resign but that, as matters had come to pass, he could not 
help but do so, and begged the Premier to exert his efforts toward 
having the Emperor designate Prince Higashikuni, the Chief of the 
General Staff, as the next Premier, in the belief that only an imperial 
prince would have power to keep control of the Army and the Navy and to 
refashion a plan (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 52).

The next day, October 15 (Japan time), Premier Konoye was received by 
Emperor Hirohito, to whom the Premier reported the foregoing 
developments. The Emperor expressed doubts concerning the desirability 
of naming Prince Higashikuni the next Premier, saying, according to 
Premier Konoye:

"In time of peace it would be all right, but in a situation in which we 
fear that there may be war, and when we also think further of the 
interests of the Imperial House, I question the advisability of a member 
of royalty standing forth (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 52)."

That evening the Premier secretly discussed the situation with Prince 
Higashikuni, who said he desired several days to think the matter over. 
However, according to Premier Konoye's memoirs, the situation would not 
permit further delay, and the following morning all of the Cabinet 
members submitted their resignations. The next day the "senior 
statesmen" met in consultation regarding the selection of the next 
Premier, but Prince Konoye did not attend (ex. 1, 3, Konoye Memoirs, pp. 
52-53). Instead, he submitted a long letter explaining in detail the 
chain of events leading to the resignation of his Cabinet (ex. 173, 
Konoye Memoirs, appendix IX, pp. 87-91).

Several of the intercepted Japanese messages confirm Prince Konoye's 
emphasis upon the Army's stand regarding the withdrawal of Japanese 
troops from China as one of the main causes of the resignation of the 
Konoye Cabinet. Thus, on October 15 (Washington time), shortly after the 
Cabinet meetings in Tokyo at which General Tojo refused to make any 
concessions regarding the evacuation of troops from China, Ambassador 
Nomura reported to the Foreign Office that the Japanese military attache 
at the Japanese Embassy in Washington had been-

"instructed by the Headquarters in Tokyo to advise us not to yield an 
inch in our stand regarding the question of the evacuation of troops. 
They are apprehensive that we have not emphasized enough our stand 
regarding it and urge us to lay special stress on this point (ex. 1, p. 
70)."

On October 17 (Japan time), Foreign Minister Toyoda cabled Ambassador 
Nomura that the Cabinet had resigned, saying:

"The resignation was brought about by a split within the Cabinet. It is 
true that one of the main items on which opinion differed was on the 
matter of stationing troops or evacuating them from China. However, 
regardless of the make-up of the new Cabinet, negotiations with the 
United States shall be continued along the lines already formulated. 
There shall be no changes in this respect.

"Please, therefore, will you and your staff work in unison and a single 
purpose, with even more effort, if possible, than before (ex. 1, p. 
76)."

Page 330             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

The Imperial Command to form a new Cabinet was given on October 17 
(Japan time) to General Hideki Tojo, who not only became Premier but 
also took the portfolios of the War and Home Ministries.  In addition to 
having been War Minister in the preceding Cabinet of Premier Konoye, 
General Tojo was an Army officer on the active list. The same day, 
Premier Konoye's private secretary, Mr. Ushiba, called on Counselor 
Dooman at the American Embassy in Tokyo, and through him conveyed to 
Ambassador Grew from the Premier

"a very interesting explanation of the circumstances which had led to 
the fall of the cabinet and the successful efforts of the Prime Minister 
to ensure the appointment of a successor who would continue the 
conversations with the United States.  The circumstances were 
extraordinarily dramatic and constitute what may in future be regarded 
as one of the really big moments in Japanese history (ex. 30, p. 458)."

Mr. Ushiba also delivered to Ambassador Grew a letter from Prince Konoye 
in which he stated that he felt certain

"that the Cabinet which is to succeed mine will exert its utmost in 
continuing to a successful conclusion the conversations which we have 
been carrying on up till today (ex. 30, p. 457)."

The following week, a "reliable Japanese informant" gave Ambassador Grew 
the following account of the events leading up the resignation of the 
Konoye Cabinet:

"The informant called on me at his own request this evening. He told me 
that just prior to the fall of the Konoye Cabinet a conference of the 
leading members of the Privy Council and of the Japanese armed forces 
had been summoned by the Emperor, who inquired if they were prepared to 
pursue a policy which would guarantee that there would be no war with 
the United States. The representatives of the Army and Navy who attended 
this conference did not reply to the Emperor's question, whereupon the 
latter, with a reference to the progressive policy pursued by the 
Emperor Meiji, his grandfather, in an unprecedented action ordered the 
armed forces to obey his wishes. The Emperor's definite stand 
necessitated the selection of a Prime Minister who would be in a 
position effectively to control the Army, the ensuing resignation of 
Prince Konoye, and the appointment of General Tojo who, while remaining 
in the Army active list, is committed to a policy of attempting to 
conclude successfully the current Japanese-American conversations (ex. 
29, vol. II, p. 697)."

On October 16 (Washington time), in a conversation with Lord Halifax, 
the British Ambassador in the United States, Ambassador Nomura said:

"The resignation of the Japanese Cabinet was due to internal differences 
between on the one hand the Prime Minister and those who wished to reach 
agreement with the United States by not insisting on the third point 
mentioned above (the right to station troops in China), and on the other 
hand those who thought that not to insist on this point would involve 
too great a loss of face.

"But the Ambassador did not anticipate any sudden change of policy. The 
Emperor was in favor of peace, and even if a general were made Prime 
Minister, it was unlikely that the Emperor's wishes would be 
disregarded.

"The outburst of a Japanese Navy spokesman as reported in the United 
States press today was of no importance, and might be disregarded.

"Everybody in the Japanese Cabinet wanted understanding with the United 
States, and the only difference was as to the price that should be paid 
for it (ex. 158)."

Two days later, on October 18 (Washington time), Ambassador Nomura 
cabled his congratulations to the new Foreign Minister, Shigenori Togo, 
at the same time expressing his fear that he would not "be able to 
accomplish much in the future" and asking the new Foreign Minister's 
approval of his returning to Japan "in the near 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 331

future so that I may personally report the situation here" (ex. 1, p. 
79). He expressed similar views in a message (ex. 1, p. 80) to the 
Japanese Navy Minister on October 20 (Washington time), and in a message 
to the new Foreign Minister 2 days later in which he said:

"I am sure that I, too, should go out with the former cabinet. * * * Nor 
do I imagine that you all have any objection. I don't want to be the 
bones of a dead horse. I don't want to continue this hypocritical 
existence, deceiving other people. No, don't think I am trying to flee 
from the field of battle, but as a man of honor this is the only way 
that is open for me to tread. Please send me your permission to return 
to Japan. Most humbly do I beseech your forgiveness if I have injured 
your dignity and I prostrate myself before you in the depth of my 
rudeness (ex. 1, p. 81)."

On October 23 (Japan time), Foreign Minister Togo cabled Ambassador 
Nomura that the outcome of the negotiations would "have a great bearing 
upon the decision as to which road the Imperial Government will pursue," 
and expressed the hope that the Ambassador would see fit "to sacrifice 
all of (his) personal wishes and remain at (his) post" (ex. 1, p. 82). 
On November 4 (Japan time), the Foreign Minister cabled Ambassador 
Nomura to "compose yourself and make up your mind to do your best." 
Finally, on November 5 (Washington time), Ambassador Nomura cabled the 
Foreign Minister that after careful consideration "I have decided to 
continue to put forth my best efforts, however feeble they may be" (ex. 
1, p. 100).

[**THE TOJO CABINET FORMULATES ITS "ABSOLUTELY FINAL PROPOSAL"**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 5, 1941)**

As the result of the Cabinet crisis in Japan, the State Department in 
Washington considered the dispatch of a personal message from President 
Roosevelt to Emperor Hirohito urging Japan to join with the United 
States to preserve peace in the Pacific area, but stating that if Japan 
should start new military operations the United States "would have to 
seek, by taking any and all steps which it might deem necessary, to 
prevent any extension" of the war (ex. 20). Such a message was not sent, 
however, pending clarification of the situation in Japan and the 
policies of the new Japanese Government (ex. 20; tr. 4494-4501).

Commencing October 17 (Japan time) the Tojo Cabinet engaged in 
preparations for a formal determination of the policies it would follow, 
and such a determination was made at an Imperial Conference on November 
5 (Japan time). During the interval between those dates, Ambassador 
Nomura received only general instructions from the Japanese Foreign 
Office concerning the course he should follow in further talks with the 
Americans. He was, however, advised on October 21 (Japan time) that

"the new cabinet differs in no way from the former one in its sincere 
desire to adjust Japanese-United States relations on a fair basis. Our 
country has said practically l she can say in the way of expressing of 
opinions and setting forth our stands. *We feel that we have now reached 
a point where no further positive action can be taken by us except to 
urge the United States to reconsider her views.*

"We urge therefore, that, choosing an opportune moment, either you or 
Wakasugi let it be known to the United States by indirection that our 
country is not in a position to spend much more time discussing this 
matter. Please continue the talks, emphasizing our desire for a formal 
United States counter proposal to our proposal of 27 September (ex. 1, 
p. 81)."

Page 332             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

These instructions were concurred in by the Japanese War and Navy 
Ministers (ex. 1, p. 84).

In accordance with the Foreign Minister's instructions, Minister 
Wakasugi called on Under Secretary Welles on October 24 (Washington 
time). The Minister told the Under Secretary that the new Japanese 
Government desired to follow the policy of the preceding Government and 
to continue the conversations without delay, adding that in his belief 
the new Government-

"had taken office under such circumstances and was pressed by tense 
public opinion to such an extent as to make it imminently desirable that 
the conversations be pressed to a satisfactory conclusion speedily (ex. 
29, vol. II, p. 693)."

He then asked whether the United States had as yet any counterproposals 
to make to the suggestions offered by the Japanese Government on 
September 27. In reply, Mr. Welles made it clear that the United States 
would be glad to continue the conversations, but suggested that recent 
belligerent public statements by high Japanese officials and the tone of 
the Japanese press were not helpful to the atmosphere in which the 
conversations would take place. When Minister Wakasugi pointed to a 
recent speech by Secretary of the Navy Knox in which Mr. Knox had said 
that a Japanese-American war was inevitable and that the United States 
Navy was on a "24-hour basis," Mr. Welles said that this simply showed 
the effect on the Navy of the statements being made in Japan. In reply 
to the Minister's inquiry regarding the possibility of counterproposals 
being submitted by the United States, Mr. Welles said that the United 
States position was fully set forth in its draft proposals of June 21 
and the statement delivered to Ambassador Nomura on October 2, and that 
for this reason he did not think any counterproposals by the United 
States were called for. The conversation concluded with a discussion of 
the possibility of taking up the three major points of disagreement in 
the following order: (1) Economic nondiscrimination, (2) Japan's status 
under the Tri-Partite Pact, and (3) the China question (ex. 29, vol. II, 
pp. 692-697). A full report on this conversation was immediately sent to 
Tokyo by Ambassador Nomura (ex. 1, pp. 82-84).

Four days later Minister Wakasugi cabled his own lengthy appraisal of 
the general attitude of the United States (ex. 1, pp. 86-87). The basic 
United States policy, he said, was the crushing of the so-called 
Hitlerism, which he defined as "the establishment of a new order through 
the force of arms." Because the United States "presumed" that Japan 
intended to develop the French Indo-China and Thailand area "under the 
principle of our military's coprosperity sphere, in a monopolistic 
manner, and through the force of arms," as contrasted with America's 
principle of economic nondiscrimination, there had arisen "a clash of 
ideologies." He said that there was every indication that the United 
States Government was "anxious to adjust the relationship between the 
two nations," but that he doubted that it would make any concessions 
from its proposals of June 21 and October 2. He expressed the opinion 
that the United States had completed its preparations "in the event of 
the worst," and that "a course of economic pressure plus watchful 
waiting" had been decided on. He felt, however, that all was not 
hopeless and that by "good-naturedly" continuing the talks there would 
be opened up "ways of breaking down differences if we make the best use 
of world developments." He concluded his report by saying:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 333

"However, if we depend on immediate settlement by settling local 
differences by insisting upon our freedom of action (sic), we must have 
our minds made up that not only will these negotiations be terminated, 
but that our national relations will be severed.

"The United States has expressed its interest in continuing with the 
talks after she has been advised of the attitude and policy of the newly 
formed Cabinet of Japan. I urge, therefore, that the new Cabinet 
establish its basic policy as speedily as possible, so that we may lay 
our cards on the table for them to see. I sincerely believe that that 
would be to our best interest (ex. 1, p. 87)."

On October 30 (Japan time) in Tokyo the new Foreign Minister received 
the diplomatic corps individually, and during the course of his talk 
with Ambassador Grew he expressed his desire that the Japanese-American 
conversations be continued and be successfully brought to a conclusion 
without delay, and he asked Ambassador Grew's cooperation to that end 
(ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 699-700). Ambassador Grew noted that, compared 
with Admiral Toyoda who had preceded him, the new Foreign Minister was 
"grim, unsmiling, and ultra-reserved" (ex. 30, p. 465). The Foreign 
Minister cabled Ambassador Nomura that he had told Ambassador Grew that 
Japanese-American relations got worse unfortunate results would ensue, a 
statement substantially similar to the statement he had made to Sir 
Robert Craigie, the British Ambassador, on October 26 (Japan time) (ex. 
1, p. 91).

The great activity in Tokyo during the period immediately after the 
formation of the Tojo Cabinet, and the attitude with which that Cabinet 
approached the continuance of the Japanese-American conversations, is 
illustrated by Foreign Minister Togo's message No. 725 of November 4 
(Japan time) to Ambassador Nomura:

"1. Well, relations between Japan and the United States have reached the 
edge, and our people are losing confidence in the possibility of ever 
adjusting them.  In order to lucubrate on a fundamental national policy, 
*the Cabinet has been meeting with the Imperial Headquarters for some 
days in succession. Conference has followed conference, and now we are 
at length able to bring forth a counterproposal for the resumption of 
Japanese-American negotiations based upon the unanimous opinion of the 
Government and the military high command (ensuing Nos. 726 and 727).* 
This and other basic policies of our Empire await the sanction of the 
conference to be held on the morning of the 5th.

"2. Conditions both within and without our Empire are so tense that no 
longer is procrastination possible, yet in our sincerity to maintain 
pacific relationships between the Empire of Japan and the United States 
of America, we have decided, as a result of these deliberations, to 
gamble once more on the continuance of the parleys, *but this is our 
last effort. Both in name and spirit this counterproposal of ours is, 
indeed, the last.* I want you to know that. *If through it we do not 
reach a quick accord, I am sorry to say the talks will certainly be 
ruptured. Then, indeed, will relations between our two nations be on the 
brink of chaos.* I0 mean that the success or failure of the pending 
discussions will have an immense effect on the destiny of the Empire of 
Japan. In fact, we gambled the fate of our land on the throw of this 
die.*

"When the Japanese-American meetings began, who would have ever dreamt 
that they would drag out so long? Hoping that we could fast come to some 
understanding we have already gone far out of our way and yielded and 
yielded. The United States does not appreciate this, but through thick 
and thin sticks to the self-same propositions she made to start with. 
Those of our people and of our officials who suspect the sincerity of 
the Americans are far from few. Bearing all kinds of humiliating things, 
our Government has repeatedly stated its sincerity and gone far, yes, 
too far, in giving in to them. There is just one reason why we do this-
to maintain peace in the Pacific. There seem to be some Americans who 
think we would make a one-sided deal, but our temperance, I can tell 
you, has not come from weakness, and naturally there is an end to our 
long-suffering. Nay, when it come to a question of our existence and our 
honor, when the time comes we will defend them without recking the cost. 
If the United States takes an attitude that overlooks or shuns this 
position of ours, 

Page 334             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

there is not a whit of use in ever broaching the talks. *This time we 
are showing the limit of our friendship; this time use are making our 
last possible bargain,* and I hope that we can thus settle all our 
troubles with the United States peaceably.

"3. It is to be hoped earnestly that looking forward *to what may come 
at the end-at the last day of Japanese-American negotiations*-the 
Government of the United States will think ever so soberly how much 
better it would be to make peace with us; how much better this would be 
for the whole world situation.

"4. Your Honor will see from the considerations above how important is 
your mission. You are at a key post, and we place great hopes in your 
being able to do something good for our nation's destiny. Will you 
please think deeply on that and compose yourself and make up your mind 
to continue to do your best?  I hope you will. Now just as soon as the 
conference is over, I will let you know immediately, and I want you to 
go and talk to President ROOSEVELT and Secretary HULL. I want you to 
tell them *how determined we are* and try to get them to foster a speedy 
understanding.

"5. In view of the gravity of these talks, as you make contacts there, 
so I will make them here. I will talk to the American Ambassador here in 
Tokyo, and as soon as you have got the consensus of the American 
officials through talking with them, please wire me. Naturally, as these 
things develop, in case you take any new steps, I want you to let me 
know and get in contact with me. In this way we will avoid letting 
anything go astray. Furthermore, lest anything go awry, *I want you to 
follow my instructions to the letter. In my instructions, I want you to 
know there will be no room for personal interpretation (ex. 1, pp. 92-
93).*"

The day the Foreign Minister sent the long message quoted above, he 
cabled Ambassador Nomura the substance of two Japanese counterproposals 
to be used in the conversations, if they should be approved at the 
Imperial Conference on November 5 (Japan time). The first proposal was 
designated "Proposal A," and was described as "*our revised ultimatum*"; 
its provisions were referred to as "*our demands*" (ex. 1, pp. 94-95). 
The second proposal, designated "Proposal B," was to be used in case of 
"remarkable" differences between the Japanese and American views, "since 
the situation does not permit of delays." It was advanced, the Foreign 
Minister said, with the idea of making "*a last effort to prevent 
something happening*" (ex. 1, p. 96-97).

At the Imperial Conference in Tokyo on November 5 (Japan time), the 
counterproposals developed in the conferences and discussions which had 
gone before were taken up and approved in the form previously sent to 
Ambassador Nomura. Foreign Minister Togo immediately cabled the 
Ambassador that he should resume the conversations, and instructed him 
to submit "Proposal A" first.  The Foreign Minister told the Ambassador 
that if it should become apparent that an agreement based upon "Proposal 
A" could not be reached, "we intend to submit *our absolutely final 
proposal*, Proposal B." He continued:

"4. As stated in my previous message, *this is the Imperial Government's 
final step. Time is becoming exceedingly short and the situation very 
critical. Absolutely no delays can be permitted*. * * *

"5. We wish to avoid giving them the impression that there is a time 
limit or that this proposal is to be taken as an ultimatum. In a 
friendly manner, show them that we are very anxious to have them accept 
our proposal (ex. 1, p. 99)."

The intercepted messages show that the Japanese Government intended to 
insist not only on a written agreement signed by the United States but 
also to require the United States to "make Great Britain and the 
Netherlands sign those terms in which they are concerned" (ex. 1, pp. 
98-99). Although the Foreign Minister instructed Ambassador Nomura to 
avoid giving the Americans the impression that "there is a time limit," 
he made it clear to the Ambassador (No. 736) that such a dead line had 
been fixed:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 335

"Because of various circumstances, *it is absolutely necessary that 
arrangements for the signing of this agreement be completed by the 25th 
of this month.* I realize that this is a difficult order, but under the 
circumstances it is an unavoidable one. Please understand this 
thoroughly and tackle the problem of saving the Japanese-U. S. relations 
*from falling into chaotic condition.* Do so with great determination 
and with unstinted effort, I beg of you (ex. 1, p. 100)."

The record before the Committee does not show whether or not the 
decision to submit the foregoing counterproposals was the only decision 
made at the Imperial Conference on November 5. It is now known, however, 
that on that date the Navy promulgated its "Combined Fleet Top Secret 
Operation Order No. 1" to all Japanese Fleet and task force commanders 
(tr. 482). The record does not show whether the issuance of this order 
was made known to the Japanese Foreign Office.

Order No. 1, itself, was brief:

"COMBINED FLEET ORDER

"Combined Fleet Operations in the War Against the UNITED STATES, GREAT 
BRITAIN, and the NETHERLANDS will be conducted in accordance with the 
Separate Volume (ex. 8)."

The separate volume, which was attached to Order No. 1, prescribed the 
operations to be conducted (a) in case war with the United States, Great 
Britain, and the Netherlands "begins during the China Operations," and 
(b) in case war with Russia "begins during the War with the United 
States, Great Britain, the Netherlands and China" (ex. 8). It stated: 
"The Empire is expecting war to break out with the United States, Great 
Britain and the Netherlands," and provided that, in such event, "In the 
east the American Fleet will be destroyed" (ex. 8).

Order No. 1 had been in course of preparation since the latter part of 
August. From September 2-13 (Japan time) a war plans conference had been 
held continuously at the Naval War College in Tokyo. It was during this 
same period, on September 6 (Japan time), that an Imperial Conference 
decided:

"If by the early part of October there is no reasonable hope of having 
our demands agreed to in the diplomatic negotiations * * *, we will 
immediately make up our minds to get ready for war against America 
(England and Holland) (ex. 173, Konoye Memoirs, p. 77)."

On September 13 (Japan time) an outline containing the essential points 
of Order No. 1 had been completed at the Naval War College, but the 
Order itself was not promulgated until immediately after the Imperial 
Conference on November 5 (Japan time) (ex. 8).

[**AMBASSADOR GREW WARNS THAT WAR WITH JAPAN MAY COME "WITH DRAMATIC AND DANGEROUS SUDDENNESS"**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 3, 1941)**

During the period which immediately preceded the Imperial Conference on 
November 5 (Japan time), Ambassador Grew was endeavoring to determine 
what the policies of the Tojo Government would be. Among the sources of 
his information was "a reliable Japanese informant" who called on the 
Ambassador on October 25 (Japan time) and again on November 3 (Japan 
time). On both occasions the information imparted by the informant fell 
short of disclosing to Ambassador Grew the actual decisions affecting 
the United States which were 

Page 336             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

being made by the Tojo Cabinet, as described above, but was sufficient 
to convince the Ambassador that the situation u-as approaching a crisis. 
He recorded that on November 3 he was told that the new Japanese 
Government "had reached a definite decision as to how far it was 
prepared to go in implementing the desires of the Emperor for an 
adjustment of relations with the United States," and that "this 
information had been communicated by the Prime Minister to the Emperor 
on the afternoon of November 2" (Japan time) (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 701).  
In his testimony before the Committee, Ambassador Grew said, referring 
to the period immediately following the fall of the Konoye Cabinet:

"I took about two weeks to size up the new situation. I was not quite 
sure what Tojo's policy was going to be. I had been assured he was going 
to try to keep on the conversations, going to do his best to come to an 
agreement with us, and all the rest of it. Frankly, I had my fingers 
crossed. I was waiting to size it up, and after I had sized it up I sent 
the telegram of November 3 (tr. 1908)."

In the telegram of November 3 (Japan time) to which Mr. Grew referred, 
he warned Secretary Hull and Under Secretary Welles that-

"Japan's resort to measures which might (make) war with the United 
States inevitable may come *with dramatic and dangerous suddenness* (ex. 
15)."

The telegram summarized his opinions on the general situation in Japan. 
In it he noted that the strong policy which he had recommended in his 
telegram of September 12, 1940 (ex. 26), called the "green light" 
telegram because it gave the go-ahead signal for economic sanctions 
against Japan, together with the impact upon Japan of political 
developments abroad had brought the Japanese Government "to seek 
conciliation with the United States." If those efforts should fail, he 
foresaw a probable swing of the pendulum in Japan back once more to its 
former position "or still further back," leading-

"to what I have called an "all out, do or die" attempt to render Japan 
impervious to foreign economic embargoes, even risking national hara 
kiri rather than cede to foreign pressure. * * * such a contingency is 
not only possible but probable (ex. 15)."

Ambassador Grew went on to express his opinion that the view that the 
progressive imposition of drastic economic measures, while attended with 
some risk of war, would probably avert war, was

"a dangerously, uncertain hypothesis upon which to base the considered 
policy and measures of the United States (ex. 15)."

Conceding that in discussing the "grave and momentous" subject of 
whether American needs, policies, and objectives justified war with 
Japan if diplomacy should fail, he was "out of touch with the 
Administration's thoughts and intentions thereon," and that his purpose 
was only to "ensure against my country's getting into war with Japan 
through any possible misconception of the capacity of Japan to rush 
headlong into a suicidal conflict with the United States," he warned 
that-

"it would be shortsighted to underestimate Japan's obvious preparations 
for a program to be implemented if her alternative program for peace 
should fail. It would be similarly shortsighted to base our policy on 
the belief that these preparations are merely in the nature of saber 
rattling (for) the exclusive purpose of giving moral support to Japan's 
high pressure diplomacy. *Japan's resort to measures which might (make) 
war with the United States inevitable may come with dramatic and 
dangerous suddenness (ex. 15).*

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 337

The State Department file copy of Ambassador Grew's telegram of November 
3 (Japan time) bears the following handwritten note:

"Paraphrase of this telegram in full given to Commander Watts, ONI, by 
telephone on November 8, 1941 (ex. 15)."

On November 17 (Japan time) Ambassador Grew cabled Secretary Hull and 
Under Secretary Welles as follows, referring specifically to the last 
sentence of his November 3 warning:

"In emphasizing need for guarding against sudden military or naval 
actions by Japan in areas not at present involved in the China conflict, 
7 am taking into account as a probability that the Japanese would 
exploit all available tactical advantages, including those of initiative 
and surprise.* It is important, however, that our Government not (repeat 
not) place upon us, including the military and naval attaches, major 
responsibility for giving prior warning."

[Discontinuous text]

"We fully realize that possibly our most important duty at this time is 
to watch for premonitory indications of military or naval operations 
which might be forthcoming against such areas and we are taking every 
precaution to guard against surprise. However, our field of military and 
naval observation is almost literally restricted to what can be seen 
with our own eyes, which is negligible. We would, therefore, advise that 
our Government, from abundance of caution, discount as far as possible 
the likelihood of our being able to give substantial warning (ex. 15)."

Ambassador Grew testified that he had no knowledge or indication 
whatever of the assembling of the Japanese naval striking force for the 
attack on Pearl Harbor, or that at the war games conducted by Admiral 
Yamamoto at the Naval War College in Tokyo between September 2 and 13 
(Japan time) the final plans were being formulated for the attack (tr. 
1481). He further testified that although he knew that a meeting of the 
Japanese Cabinet took place on December 1, he "did not (know) and could 
not have guessed" that the Cabinet had discussed the attack on Pearl 
Harbor (tr. 1615), and that, with the single exception of the 
information upon which his message of January 27, 1941 (Japan time) (ex. 
15) was based, he had no information of any character prior to the 
attack on Pearl Harbor which indicated the possibility of such an attack 
by the Japanese (tr. 1477).

[**GENERALISSIMO CHIANG KAI-SHEK APPEALS TO GREAT BRITAIN AND THE UNITED STATES FOR AID**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(October 28-November 4, 1941)**

During the latter part of October, the Japanese began extensive troop 
concentrations at Haiphong on the coast of northern French Indochina, 
and steady streams of Japanese military supplies and materials were 
reported arriving at Hainan (off the northern coast of French Indochina) 
and at Formosa. As a result of these and other Japanese military 
movements, which were interpreted in Chungking as foreshadowing an early 
invasion of Yunnan Province for the purpose of taking the city of 
Kunming and severing the Burma Road, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek made 
strenuous efforts to obtain British and American air support for his 
ground forces in that area.

On October 28 at his first meeting in Chungking with General Magruder, 
the head of the recently arrived United States military mission to 
China, the Generalissimo asked General Magruder to 

[1] Ambassador Grew's message of January 27 1941 (Japan time) follows 
"My Peruvian colleague told a member of my staff that he had heard from 
many sources including a Japanese sour e that the Japanese military 
forces planned in the event of trouble with the United States to attempt 
a surprise mass attack on Pearl Harbor using all of their military 
facilities. He added that although the project seemed fantastic the fact 
that he had heard it from many sources prompted him to pass on the 
information" (ex 15) Paraphrased copies were promptly sent by the State 
Department to Military Intelligence Division (Army) and Office of Naval 
Intelligence (Navy) (ex. 15).

Page 338             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

inform Washington at once of the threatening situation, and urged that 
President Roosevelt "intercede with London to make available the 
Singapore air forces to support his defense." He pled with General 
Magruder that the President "be urged to bring diplomatic pressure on 
Japan and to appeal as well to Britain jointly to warn Japan that an 
attack upon Kunming would be considered inimical to our interests." He 
insisted that if the Japanese should take Kunming and thus sever the 
Burma Road, Chinese resistance would end and a Japanese attack on the 
Malay Peninsula would inevitably follow. He believed his land forces 
could resist the anticipated attack only with air support, which he did 
not have and which only the British air forces at Singapore could 
furnish in time. General Magruder immediately radioed the 
Generalissimo's plea to Secretary Stimson and General Marshall, after 
discussing the interview with Ambassador Gauss (ex. 47).

In Washington, on the morning of October 30 (Washington time), Mr. T. V. 
Soong handed to Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau, a message from 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek which repeated the substance of what the 
Generalissimo had said to General Magruder.  Chiang's message urged the 
United States "to use strong pressure on Britain to send Singapore Air 
Force to cooperate with Colonel Chennault in order to save democratic 
position in Far East" and stressed the critical nature of the situation 
(ex. 16-A). Secretary Morgenthau sent the Generalissimo's message to 
President Roosevelt on the same day, without written comment and the 
President forwarded it to Secretary Hull with this handwritten note:

"C. H. Can we do anything along these lines? How about telling Japan a 
move to close Burma Road would be inimical? F. D. R. (Ex. 16-A)."

On November 1 (Washington time), Secretary Hull called a conference at 
the State Department which was attended by, among others, the Secretary, 
Under Secretary Welles, and Dr. Stanley K. Hornbeck, for that 
Department, and by General Leonard T. Gerow, Chief of War Plans 
Division, for the War Department and Admiral R. E. Schuirmann, Director 
of the Central Division, for the Navy Department.  The conference was 
called for the purpose of discussing what action should be taken in 
response to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's plea. Secretary Hull 
expressed the opinion that "there was no use to issue any additional 
warnings to Japan if we can't back them up," and the Secretary therefore 
desired to know whether "the military authorities would be prepared to 
support further warnings by the State Department." A second meeting in 
the same connection was held at the State Department the following day 
(ex. 16)."

General Gerow submitted a report on these meetings to General Marshall 
on November 3 (Washington time) in which he pointed out that the 
Military Intelligence Division's (G-2's) latest estimate did not support 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's conclusions as to the imminence of a 
Japanese move toward Kunming, though agreeing that the fall of Kunming 
would seriously affect Chinese resistance to Japan. After reviewing the 
strength of the United States forces in the Philippines and concluding 
that the dispatch of any considerable portion of the air garrison there 
would leave the island of Luzon open to serious risk of capture, General 
Gerow's report summarized certain "strong" opinions of the War Plans 
Division, which were stated as follows:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK                 Page 339

"a. The policies derived in the American-British Staff conversations 
remain sound; viz.:
    (1) The primary objective is the defeat of Germany.
    (2) The principal objective in the Far East is to keep Japan out of 
        the war.
    (3) Military counter action against Japan should be considered only 
        in case of any of the following actions by Japan (which were 
        then enumerated).

[Discontinuous text]

"d. *Political and economic measures should be used wherever effective 
to deter Japanese action
"e. * * * *Strong diplomatic and economic pressure may be exerted from 
the military viewpoint, at the earliest, about the middle of December 
1941,* when the Philippine Air Force will have become a positive threat 
to Japanese operations. It would be advantageous, if practicable, to 
delay severe diplomatic and economic pressure until February or March 
1942, when the Philippine Air Force will have reached its projected 
strength, and a safe air route, through Samoa, will be in operation. 
(ex. 16)."

The weekly meeting of the Army-Navy Joint Board scheduled for November 5 
(Washington time) was held on the afternoon of November 3 (Washington 
time). The question of aid to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek received 
more attention than any other item on the agenda (ex. 16). Admiral Royal 
E. Ingersoll presented the situation as the Navy saw it and General 
Marshall gave the Army's viewpoint.  Admiral Schuirmann reported on the 
two meetings at the State Department and read a memorandum (tr. 5520-
5523) prepared by Dr. Hornbeck in which the latter stated his personal 
opinion in favor of a firm representation to Japan, even though war 
might result.  Among other things, General Marshall said that it was his 
information that "the Japanese authorities might be expected to decide 
upon the national policy by November 5," apparently referring to the 
intercepted Japanese messages between Washington and Tokyo regarding the 
Imperial Conference to be held in Tokyo on that date. He expressed the 
view that-

"Until powerful United States Forces had been built up in the Far East, 
it would take some very clever diplomacy to save the situation. *It 
appeared that the basis of U. S. Policy should be to make certain minor 
concessions which the Japanese could use in saving face. These 
concessions might be a relaxation on oil restrictions or on similar 
trade restrictions (ex. 16).*"

Following these discussions the Joint Board decided that-

"War Plans Division of the War and Navy Departments would prepare a 
memorandum for the President, as a reply to the State Department's 
proposed policy in the Far Eastern situation. The memorandum would take 
the following lines:
"Oppose the issuance of an ultimatum to Japan. 
"Oppose U. S. military action against Japan should she move into Yunnan.
"Oppose the movement and employment of U. S. Military forces in support 
of Chiang Kai-shek.
"Advocate State Department action to put off hostilities with Japan as 
long as possible.
"Suggest agreement with Japan to tide the situation over for the next 
several months.
"Point out the effect and cost a U. S.-Japanese war in the Far East 
would have on defense aid to Great Britain and other nations being aided 
by the U. S.
"Emphasize the existing limitations on shipping and the inability of the 
U. S. to engage in a Far Eastern offensive without the transfer of the 
major portion of shipping facilities from the Atlantic to the Pacific 
(ex. 16)."

That evening, November 3 (Washington time), the State Department 
received a telegram from Ambassador Gauss in Chungking to the effect 
that while it was not yet certain that Japan would undertake an invasion 
of Yunnan from Indochina, it was believed certain that in any case large 
Japanese air forces would operate against the 

Page 340             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Burma Road and any volunteer air forces in China, and that accordingly, 
if Anglo-American air units were sent into Yunnan, they should be in 
sufficient force to maintain themselves against heavy Japanese air 
concentrations. "Half or token measures " the Ambassador advised, "would 
prove dangerous" (ex. 47).

The next morning, November 4 (Washington time), the State Department 
received from the Chinese Embassy a personal message to President 
Roosevelt from Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek (ex. 47). This message 
quoted a lengthy message which the Generalissimo had sent directly to 
Prime Minister Churchill, in which the Generalissimo expressed 
substantially the same views as those he had communicated to General 
Magruder, and urged that the British air force in Malaya, "with American 
cooperation," be sent to his assistance to resist the anticipated 
assault on Yunnan and Kunming. The Generalissimo then urged the United 
States "to draw on its air arm in the Philippines to provide either an 
active unit or a reserve force in the combined operation," saying that-

"unless Japan is checked sharply and at once, she is on the verge of 
winning a position from which she can deal with each of us separately 
and in her own time (ex. 47)."

Neither the Generalissimo's message addressed to the Prime Minister nor 
his message addressed to the President made any further reference to the 
proposal that a warning to Japan be issued by Britain or the United 
States. On the 4th Secretary Hull held separate conferences at the State 
Department with Secretary Knox, and with General Marshall and Admiral 
Ingersoll (tr. 1171, 1173).

The next day, November 5 (Washington time), President Roosevelt received 
the following message from Prime Minister Churchill:

"I have received Chiang Kai-shek's attached appeal addressed to us both 
for air assistance. You know how we are placed for air strength at 
Singapore. Nonetheless, I should be prepared to send pilots and even 
some planes if they could arrive in time.

"What we need now is a deterrent of the most general and formidable 
character. The Japanese have as yet taken no final decision, and the 
Emperor appears to be exercising restraint. When we talked about this at 
Argentia you spoke of gaining time, and this policy has been brilliantly 
successful so far. But our joint embargo is steadily forcing the 
Japanese to decisions for peace or war.

"It now looks as if they would go into Yunnan cutting the Burma Road 
with disastrous consequence for Chiang Kai-shek. The collapse of his 
resistance would not only be a world tragedy in itself, but it would 
leave the Japanese with large forces to attack north or south.

"The Chinese have appealed to us, as I believe they have to you, to warn 
the Japanese against an attack on Yunnan. I hope you might remind them 
that such an attack, aimed at China from a region in which we have never 
recognized that the Japanese have any right to maintain forces, would be 
in open disregard of the clearly indicated attitude of the United States 
Government. We should, of course, be ready to make a similar 
communication.

"No independent action by ourselves will deter Japan because we are so 
much tied up elsewhere. But of course we will stand with you and do our 
utmost to back you in whatever course you choose. I think myself, that 
Japan is more likely to drift into war than to plunge in. Please let me 
know what you think (ex. 158)."

President Roosevelt did not reply to Prime Minister Churchill until 2 
days later. In the meantime, General Marshall and Admiral Stark 
submitted to him, under date of November 5 (Washington time), a joint 
memorandum (ex. 16) pursuant to the action of the Joint Board referred 
to above. In their joint memorandum

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK          Page 341

General Marshall and Admiral Stark referred to the various 
communications from Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek which have been 
mentioned above, and to Secretary Hull's request for advice "as to the 
attitude which this Government should take" toward a Japanese offensive 
against Kunming and the Burma Road, and stated that the question they 
had considered was-

"whether or not the United States is justified in undertaking offensive 
military operations with U. S. Forces against Japan, to prevent her from 
severing the Burma Road. They consider that such operations, how-ever 
well disguised, would lead to war."

In answering this question, General Marshall and Admiral Stark then 
advised the President:

"At the present time the United States Fleet in the Pacific is inferior 
to the Japanese Fleet and cannot undertake an unlimited strategic 
offensive in the Western Pacific. In order to be able to do so, it would 
have to be strengthened by withdrawing practically all naval vessels 
from the Atlantic except those assigned to local defense forces. An 
unlimited offensive by the Pacific Fleet would require tremendous 
merchant tonnage, which could only be withdrawn from services now 
considered essential. The result of withdrawals from the Atlantic of 
naval and merchant strength might well cause the United Kingdom to lose 
the Battle of the Atlantic in the near future.

"The current plans for war against Japan in the Far East are to conduct 
defensive war, in cooperation with the British and Dutch, for the 
defense of the Philippines and the British and Dutch East Indies. The 
Philippines are now being reinforced. The present combined naval, air, 
and ground forces will make attack on the islands a hazardous 
undertaking. By about the middle of December 1941, United States air and 
submarine strength in the Philippines will have become a positive threat 
to any Japanese operations south of Formosa. The U. S. Army air forces 
in the Philippines will have reached the projected strength by February 
or March, 1942. The potency of this threat will have then increased to a 
point where it might well be a deciding factor in deterring Japan in  
operations in the areas south and west of the Philippines. By this time, 
additional British naval and air reinforcements to Singapore will have 
arrived. The general defensive strength of the entire southern area 
against possible Japanese operations will then have reached impressive 
proportions.

"Until such a time as the Burma Road is closed, aid can be extended to 
Chiang Kai-shek by measures which probably will not result in war with 
Japan. These measures are: continuation of economic pressure against 
Japan, supplying increasing amounts of munitions under the Lend-Lease, 
and continuation and acceleration of aid to the American Volunteer 
Group.

"The Chief of Naval Operations and the Chief of Staff are in accord in 
the following conclusions:

"(a) The basic military policies and strategy agreed to in the United 
States-British Staff conversations remain sound. The primary objective 
of the two nations is the defeat of Germany. If Japan be defeated and 
Germany remain undefeated, decision will still have not been reached. In 
any case, an unlimited offensive war should not be undertaken against 
Japan, since such a war would greatly weaken the combined effort in the 
Atlantic against Germany, the most dangerous enemy.
"(b) *War between the United States and Japan should be avoided while 
building up defensive forces in the Far East, until such time as Japan 
attacks or directly threatens territories whose security to the United 
States is of very great importance.* Military action against Japan 
should be undertaken only in one or more of the following contingencies:
"    (1) A direct act of war by Japanese armed forces against the 
  territory or mandated territory of the United States, the British 
  Commonwealth, or the Netherlands East Indies;
"    (2) The movement of Japanese forces into Thailand to the west of 
  100  East or south of 10  North; or into Portuguese Timor, New 
  Caledonia, or Loyalty Islands.
"(c) If war with Japan can not be avoided, it should follow the 
strategic lines of existing war plans; i. e., military operations should 
be primarily defensive, with the object of holding territory, and 
weakening Japan's economic position.

Page 342             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"(d) Considering world strategy, a Japanese advance against Kunming, 
into Thailand, except as previously indicated, or an attack on Russia, 
would not justify intervention by the United States against Japan.

"(e) All possible aid short of actual war against Japan should be 
extended to the Chinese Central Government

"(f) In case it is decided to undertake war against Japan, complete 
coordinated action in the diplomatic, economic, and military fields, 
should be undertaken in common by the United States, the British 
Commonwealth, and the Netherlands East Indies.

"The Chief of Naval Operations and the Chief of Staff recommend that the 
United States policy in the Far East be based on the above conclusions.

"Specifically, they recommend:

"That the dispatch of United States armed forces for intervention 
against Japan in China be disapproved.

"That material aid to China be accelerated consonant with the needs of 
Russia, Great Britain, and our own forces.

"That aid to the American Volunteer Group be continued and accelerated 
to the maximum practicable extent.

"*That no ultimatum be delivered to Japan (ex. 16).*

Secretary Hull testified that he-

"was in thorough accord with the views of the Chief of Staff and the 
Chief of Naval Operations that United States armed forces should not be 
sent to China for use against Japan. I also believed so far as American 
foreign policy considerations were involved that material to China 
should be accelerated as much as feasible and that aid to the American 
Volunteer Group should be accelerated. Finally *I concurred completely 
in the view that no ultimatum should be delivered to Japan. I had been 
striving for months to avoid a showdown with Japan, and to explore every 
possible avenue for averting or delaying war between the United States 
and Japan.  That was the cornerstone of the effort which the President 
and I were putting forth with our utmost patience.* (tr. 1130)."

On November 7 (Washington time), President Roosevelt sent the following 
reply, prepared in the State Department, to Prime Minister Churchill's 
message of the 5th: 

"We have very much in mind the situation to which Chiang Kai-shek's 
appeal is addressed. While we feel that it would be a serious error to 
underestimate the gravity of the threat inherent in that situation, we 
doubt whether preparations for a Japanese land campaign against Kunming 
have advanced to a point which would warrant an advance by the Japanese 
against Yunnan in the immediate future. In the meantime we shall do what 
we can to increase and expedite lend lease aid to China and to 
facilitate the building up of the American volunteer air force, both in 
personnel and in equipment. We have noted that you would be prepared to 
send pilots and some planes to China.

"We feel that measures such as the foregoing and those which you have in 
mind along the lines we are taking, together with continuing efforts to 
strengthen our defenses in the Philippine Islands, paralleled by similar 
efforts by you in the Singapore area, will tend to increase Japan's 
hesitation, whereas in Japan's present mood new formalized verbal 
warning or remonstrances might have, with at least even chance, an 
opposite effect.

"This whole problem will have our continuing and earnest attention, 
study, and effort.

"I shall probably not, repeat not, make express reply to Chiang Kai-shek 
before the first of next week. Please keep within the confidence of your 
close official circle that I have said above (ex. 16-B)."

The record shows that on November 8, Secretary Hull conferred at the 
State Department with General Miles, head of the Military Intelligence 
Division (G-2), General Staff (tr. 1173), and on November 10 with 
Secretary Knox (tr. 1171). On the latter date he sent to President 
Roosevelt a draft of a proposed reply to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. 
The next day the President dictated the following brief note to his 
aide, General Watson, which was attached to the Secretary's draft and 
read:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 343

"I want to see Hu Shih for five minutes on Wednesday, and give this to 
me when he comes (ex. 16)."

Written on the same sheet of paper, below the typewritten note to 
General Watson and apparently after the conference with Dr. Hu Shih, the 
Chinese Ambassador, appears the following, in the President's 
handwriting:

"C. H.  O. K. to send. F. D. R. (EX. 16)."

The draft was then returned to the State Department, where the message 
in final form was handed to Dr. Hu Shih late in the afternoon of 
November 14 (Washington time) for transmittal to Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek. In it President Roosevelt described briefly the intensive 
consideration that had been given to the Generalissimo's appeal, and 
continued: 

"Under existing circumstances, taking into consideration the world 
situation in its political, military, and economic aspects, we feel that 
the most effective contribution which we can make at this moment is 
along the line of speeding up the flow to China of our Lend-Lease 
materials and facilitating the building up of the American Volunteer air 
force, both in personnel and in equipment. We are subjected at present, 
as you know, to demands from many quarters and in many connections. We 
are sending materials not only to China and Great Britain, but to the 
Dutch, the Soviet Union, and some twenty other countries that are 
calling urgently for equipment for self-defense. In-addition, our 
program for our own defense, especially the needs of our rapidly 
expanding Navy and Army, calls for equipment in large amount and with 
great promptness. Nevertheless, I shall do my utmost toward achieving 
expedition of increasing expedition of increasing amounts of material 
for your use. Meanwhile we are exchanging views with the British 
Government in regard to the entire situation and the tremendous problems 
which are presented, with a view to effective coordinating of efforts in 
the most practicable ways possible. 

"I believe that you will share my feeling that measures such as the 
foregoing, together with such as the British doubtless are considering, 
adopted and implemented simultaneously with your intensive efforts to 
strengthen the defenses of Yunnan Province are sound steps toward 
safeguarding against such threat of an attack upon Yunnan as may be 
developing. Indirectly influencing that situation: American military and 
naval defensive forces in the Philippine Islands, which are being 
steadily increased, and the United States Fleet at Hawaii, lying as they 
do along the flank of any Japanese military movement into China from 
Indochina, are ever present and significant factors in the whole 
situation, as are the increasing British and Dutch defensive 
preparations in their territories to the south.

"This Government has on numerous occasions pointed out to the Government 
of Japan various consequences inherent in pursuit of courses of 
aggression and conquest. We shall continue to impress this point of view 
upon Japan on every appropriate occasion (ex. 16)."

In accordance with the joint recommendation that had been made by 
General Marshall and Admiral Stark, no warning was delivered to Japan as 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek had urged.

It is clear that the movement of additional Japanese troops into 
northern French Indochina had a twofold purpose. On the one hand he 
troops were an immediate threat to China by their proximity to Yunnan 
Province, the Burma Road, and Kunming on the north and northwest. 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's appeal for aid recognized the immediacy 
of that threat. On the other hand, the additional Japanese forces 
increased the potential threat to the British Malay States and 
Singapore, and to the Netherlands East Indies and the Philippines. The 
price the Japanese Government hoped to exact from the United States and 
Great Britain for the removal of this latter threat had been determined 
at the Imperial Conference on September 6 (Japan time). The subsequent 
fall of the Konoye

Page 344                   PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Cabinet and accession of General Tojo in October had only increased 
Japan's determination to use this potential threat to blackmail the 
United States, if possible, into (1) ceasing all aid to China, (2) 
accepting a military and naval status in the Far East inferior to that 
of Japan, and (3) furnishing all possible material aid to Japan. 
Furthermore, since the Japanese Army at no time evidenced a willingness 
to withdraw its troops from China, or to agree not to use northern 
French Indo-China as a base for operations against China it would seem 
clear that the Japanese strategy was not only to blackmail the United 
States into granting those ".minimum demands" but also, having 
accomplished that, to turn on China from northern French Indochina and 
thus to expedite the liquidation of the "China Incident" and the 
establishment of a Japanese " just peace" in the Far East.

[**JAPAN DELIVERS ITS NEXT-TO-LAST PROPOSAL TO THE UNITED STATES**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 10, 1941)**

After the Imperial Conference on November 5 (Japan time) the Japanese-
American conversations were "on the last lap" as far as the Japanese 
Government was concerned (ex. 1, p. 101). Immediately after that 
conference the final Japanese diplomatic, naval, and military maneuvers 
began. The instructions Foreign Minister Togo sent to Ambassador Nomura 
to resume the talks and to present proposal "A" to the United States 
Government had their counterparts in operational orders issued to the 
Japanese Navy and, without doubt, to the Japanese Army as well. Those 
orders contemplated naval, air; and troop dispositions which were 
commenced immediately. Many of those dispositions were detected and 
observed by the United States, Great Britain, or the Netherlands, but 
the major Japanese naval movement was successfully kept secret by the 
Japanese until the attack on Pearl Harbor on the morning of December 7, 
1941.

It is imperative to an accurate appraisal of this closing period of the 
Japanese-American conversations to keep in mind those Japanese military 
and naval dispositions. Reports of the military movements toward the 
south and alarms about Japanese naval movements (except the one toward 
Pearl Harbor) reached Washington and the State Department during 
November as the Japanese Ambassadors were presenting their final 
proposals, and again, as in July, discredited the intentions of the 
Japanese Government. Commencing in the middle of November the American 
consuls at Hanoi and Saigon in north and south French Indochina reported 
extensive new landings of Japanese troops and equipment in Indochina 
(tr. 1138). About November 21 (Washington time) the State Department 
received word that the Dutch had information that a Japanese naval force 
had arrived near Palao, the nearest point in the Japanese mandated 
islands to the heart of the Netherlands Indies (ex. 21; tr. 1138).

It is now known that at the same time a powerful Japanese naval striking 
force, its formation and purpose successfully kept secret, was 
assembling in a northern Japanese harbor for the attack on the United 
States Pacific Fleet, under orders issued on or about November 14 (Japan 
time). On November 21 (Japan time) the commander in chief of the 
combined Japanese fleet was directed to order his forces

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 345

to advance to the area in which they were to wait in readiness and to 
station them in such positions that-

"in the event of the situation becoming such that commencement of 
hostilities be inevitable, they will be able to meet the situation 
promptly (tr. 43S7)."

On November 25 (Japan time) the commander in chief issued an order which 
directed the naval striking force to "advance into Hawaiian waters and 
upon the very opening of hostilities * * * attack the main force of the 
United States Fleet in Hawaii and deal it a mortal blow" (tr. 437). The 
order provided, however, that-

"Should it appear certain that Japanese-American negotiations will reach 
an amicable settlement prior to the commencement of hostile action, all 
the forces of the Combined Fleet are to be ordered to reassemble and 
return to their bases (tr. 437)."

The striking force sailed from Hitokappu Bay in northern Japan at 9 a. 
m. November 26 (Japan time), or about 7 p. m. on November 25 (Washington 
time) (tr. 450).

In the meantime, it had been decided in Tokyo to send Saburu Kurusu, 
former Japanese Ambassador to Germany, to Washington to assist 
Ambassador Nomura. On the evening of November 4 (Japan time) Mr. Kurusu 
told Ambassador Grew that the mission had been broached to him "only 
yesterday afternoon" (ex. 3O, p. 471), although it appears from the 
comments made by Foreign Minister Toyoda to Ambassador Grew on October 
10 (Japan time) that the matter had been under consideration for some 
time. Arrangements were made by the State Department for the Pan-
American Clipper to be held in Hong Kong for 2 days to permit Mr. Kurusu 
to travel on that plane, and he left Tokyo early on November 5 (Japan 
time). Foreign Minister Togo cabled Ambassador Nomura on November 4 
(Japan time) of this development, saying that Ambassador Kurusu was 
being sent to assist Ambassador Nomura and to be his "right-hand man" in 
view of "the gravity of the present negotiations and in view of your 
request on instructions from me" (ex. 1, p. 97). Two days later the 
Foreign Minister cabled that the reason for Ambassador Kurusu's dispatch 
"so quickly" was "to show our Empire's sincerity in the negotiations 
soon to follow." The officials of the Japanese Army and Navy, the 
Foreign Minister said, were "pleased with the special dispatch of the 
Ambassador" (ex. 1, p. 101).

In Washington, as soon as he received Foreign Minister Togo's 
instructions to resume the conversations, Ambassador Nomura arranged a 
meeting with Secretary Hull. At that meeting, which took place on the 
morning of November 7 (Washington time), Ambassador Nomura informed the 
Secretary that he had now received instructions from the new Japanese 
Government, and that he wished to resume the conversations. He then said 
that the new Japanese Cabinet had deliberated on the various questions 
at issue between the two Governments-

"with a view to making the utmost concessions that they could make, 
having due regard for the situation in the Far East and the attitude of 
public opinion in Japan (vol. II, p. 707)."

He said that of the three principal questions on which there were 
divergent views, he thought that it would not be difficult to reconcile 
the views of the two Governments on two, namely, nondiscrimination in 
international trade and Japan's obligations under the Tripartite

Page 346             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Pact. He realized that the difficulties of reaching an agreement on the 
third, the China question, were greater. So saying, he handed to 
Secretary Hull a document (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 709-710) containing 
formulae relating to the withdrawal of Japanese troops from China and to 
nondiscrimination in international trade. This document was, he said, to 
be taken in conjunction with the United States proposals of June 21 and 
October 2 and the Japanese proposal delivered to the Secretary on 
September 27. It embodied the substance of the provisions of proposal 
"A" regarding those two points, but was silent regarding the question of 
Japan's obligations under the Tripartite Pact. Secretary Hull expressed 
the hope that some concrete statement concerning the latter point could 
be worked out that would be of help, but Ambassador Nomura said it did 
not seem to him any further statement was necessary than had already 
been made, considering the attitude of the Japanese Government which 
"manifestly desired to maintain peace in the Pacific." During the 
conversation Secretary Hull again mentioned that before entering into 
any formal negotiations he intended to discuss the matter with the 
Chinese, the British, and the Dutch (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 708). 
Ambassador Nomura requested a meeting with President Roosevelt, which 
was subsequently arranged for November 10 (Washington time).

The afternoon of November 7 (Washington time), Secretary Hull attended a 
Cabinet meeting at the White House. The situation in the Far East 
appears to have been uppermost in the minds of those present; especially 
the President, Secretary Hull, and Secretary Stimson. Secretary Stimson 
had had a conference with the President the day before, November 6 
(Washington time), and had recorded in his daily notes that he and the 
President had talked-

"about the Far Eastern situation and the approaching conference with the 
messenger who is coming from Japan. The President outlined what he 
thought he might say. *He was trying to think of something which would 
save us further time.*  He suggested he might propose a truce in which 
there would be no movement or armament for 6 months and then if the 
Japanese and Chinese had not settled their arrangement in that 
meanwhile, we could go on on the same basis. I told him I frankly saw 
two great objections to that; first, that it tied up our hands just at a 
time when it was vitally important that we should go on completing our 
reinforcement of the Philippines; and second, that the Chinese would 
feel that any such arrangement was a desertion of them. I reminded him 
that it has always been our historic policy since the Washington 
conference not to leave the Chinese and Japanese alone together, because 
the Japanese were always able to overslaugh the Chinese and the Chinese 
know it. I told him that I thought the Chinese would refuse to go into 
such an arrangement (tr. 14414-14415)."

The morning of the next day, November 7 (Washington time), Admiral John 
R. Beardall, President Roosevelt's naval aide, at the President's 
direction, requested the appropriate officers in the Navy Department to 
arrange for the delivery to the President of complete translations of 
the intercepted Japanese messages, rather than memoranda briefly 
summarizing the messages as had been delivered theretofore under the 
existing agreement between the Army and the Navy in that connection. 
Such arrangements were made and, commencing November 12 (Washington 
time), complete translations were delivered each day to Admiral Beardall 
for delivery to President Roosevelt. According to reported statements 
made by Admiral Beardall at the time, the President told him that he 
(the President) "was in fact either seeing or being told about the 
material through Hull" (tr. 14525-14526).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 347

According to Secretary Stimson's notes of the Cabinet meeting on 
November 7 (Washington time), President Roosevelt took-

"what be said was the first general poll of his Cabinet and it was on 
the question of the Far East-whether the people would back us up in case 
we struck at Japan down there and what the tactics should be. It was a 
very interesting talk-the best Cabinet meeting I think we have ever had 
since I have been there. He went around the table first Hull and then 
myself, and then around through the whole number and it was unanimous in 
feeling the country would support us.  He said that this time the vote 
is unanimous, he feeling the same way. Hull made a good presentation of 
the general situation. I told them I rather narrowed it down into a 
following-up the steps which had been done to show what needed to be 
done in the future. The thing would have been much stronger if the 
Cabinet had known-and they did not know except in the case of Hull and 
the President-what the Army is doing with the big bombers and how ready 
we are to pitch in (tr. 14415-14416)."

Secretary Hull testified that at this Cabinet meeting after President 
Roosevelt turned to him and asked whether he had anything in mind-

" thereupon pointed out for about 15 minutes the dangers in the 
international situation. I went over fully developments in the 
conversations with Japan and *emphasized that in my opinion relations 
were extremely critical and that we should be on the lookout for a 
military attack anywhere by Japan at any time*. When I finished, the 
President went around the Cabinet. *All concurred in my estimate of the 
dangers.* It became the consensus of the Cabinet that the critical 
situation might well be emphasized in speeches in order that the country 
would, if possible, be better prepared for such a development.

"accordingly, Secretary of the Navy Knox delivered an address on 
November 11, 1941, in which he stated that we were not only confronted 
with the necessity of extreme measures of self-defense in the Atlantic, 
but we were " likewise faced with grim possibilities on the other side 
of the world on the far side of the Pacific"; and the Pacific no less 
than the Atlantic called for instant readiness for defense.

"On the same day Under Secretary of State Welles in an address stated 
that beyond the Atlantic a sinister and pitiless conqueror had reduced 
more than half of Europe to abject serfdom and that in the Far East the 
same forces of conquest were menacing the safety of all nations 
bordering on the Pacific. The waves of world conquest were "breaking 
high both in the East and in the West," he said, and were threatening 
more and more with each passing day "to engulf our own shores." He 
warned that the United States was in far greater peril than in 1917; 
that "at any moment war may be forced upon us" (tr. 1131-1132)."

Statements which were made by Foreign Minister Togo to Ambassador Grew 
in Tokyo 3 days later, on November 10 (Japan time), show the attitude 
with which the Japanese Foreign Office was approaching the conversations 
during this period immediately following the Imperial Conference on 
November 5. After informing the Ambassador that new proposals had been 
sent to Ambassador Nomura for presentation to the United States 
Government, the Foreign Minister urged the necessity of a speedy 
settlement, saying that national sentiment would "not tolerate further 
protracted delay in arriving at some conclusion" and that the position 
was "daily becoming more pressing." He said that the new proposals 
represented the "maximum possible concessions by Japan," and handed to 
the Ambassador the texts of the two documents submitted to Secretary 
Hull on November 7. During the Foreign Minister's comments on these 
documents, he expressed the desire that the British Government should 
conclude an agreement with Japan simultaneously with the United States, 
in view of Great Britain's interests in the Pacific. The Foreign 
Minister told Ambassador Grew that he felt that the United States did 
not adequately appreciate the realities of the situation in the Far 
East. Referring to the steadily increasing population of Japan, he 
stated it

Page 348             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

was necessary to assure the raw materials necessary for the existence of 
that population and that unless the United States realized this fact as 
among the realities of the situation, a successful conclusion to the 
conversations would be difficult. Ambassador Grew told the Minister that 
his statements penetrated to the heart of the whole problem, since one 
of the fundamental purposes of the conversations was to open a way for 
Japan to obtain such necessary supplies, together with a full flow of 
trade and commerce and market for her industries, but by peaceful means 
as opposed to the use of force. In reply to this the Minister said, as 
reported by Ambassador Grew, that-

"He did not wish to go into the fundamentals of the question, but he 
thought that he could advert briefly to the importance of commercial and 
economic relations between the United States and Japan. The freezing by 
the United States of Japanese assets had stopped supplies of many 
important raw materials to Japan. Economic pressure of this character is 
capable of menacing national existence to a greater degree than the 
direct use of force. He hoped that the American Government would take 
into consideration circumstances of this character and realize the 
possibility that the Japanese people, if exposed to continued economic 
pressure, might eventually feel obliged resolutely to resort to measures 
of self-defense (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 714)."

The Minister saw no inconsistency between insisting that Japan would not 
give up the fruits of 4 years of hostilities in China and at the same 
time accepting the principle of refraining from aggression and the use 
of force (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 710-714; ex. 1, pp. 109-111).

Ambassador Nomura's meeting with President Roosevelt took place at the 
White House on the morning of November 10 (Washington time), with 
Secretary Hull and Minister Wakasugi present. At this meeting the 
Ambassador read from a prepared document an explanation of the proposals 
he had been instructed by his Government to present (i. e., proposal 
"A"), the substance of which (except as regards the Tripartite Pact) he 
had already communicated to Secretary Hull on November 7. Regarding the 
first question, the application of the principle of nondiscrimination in 
international trade, he said that his Government had now decided to 
accept its application in all Pacific areas, including China, upon the 
understanding that the principle would be applied uniformly to the rest 
of the world as well. As to the second question, the attitude of the two 
Governments toward the European war, he stated that his Government was 
not prepared to go further in black and white than the language 
contained in its proposal of September 27, which was:

"Both Governments maintain it their common aim to bring about peace in 
the world, and, when an opportune time arrives, they will endeavor 
jointly for the early restoration of world peace.

"With regard to developments of the situation prior to the restoration 
of world peace, both Governments will be guided in their conduct by 
considerations of protection and self-defense; and, in case the United 
States should participate in the European War, Japan would decide 
entirely independently in the matter of interpretation of the Tripartite 
Pact between Japan, Germany, and Italy, and would likewise determine 
what actions might be taken by way of fulfilling the obligations in 
accordance with the said interpretation (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 638)."

He added that if the United States was in a position to give assurance 
that it had no intention of placing too liberal an interpretation on the 
term "protection and self-defense," his Government would be prepared to 
reciprocate. Concerning the third question, the stationing and 
withdrawal of troops from China and French Indochina, Ambassador Nomura 
submitted the following formula:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK                Page 349

"With regard to the Japanese forces which have been dispatched to China 
in connection with the China Affair, those forces in specified areas of 
North China and Mengchiang (Inner Mongolia) as well as in Hainan-tao 
(Hainan Island) will remain to be stationed for a certain required 
duration after the restoration of peaceful relations between Japan and 
China. All the rest of such forces will commence withdrawal as soon as 
general peace is restored between Japan and China and the withdrawal 
will proceed according to separate arrangements between Japan and China 
and will be completed within two years with the firm establishment of 
peace and order.

"The Japanese Government undertake to respect the territorial 
sovereignty of French Indo-China. The Japanese forces at present 
stationed there will be withdrawn as soon as the China Affair is settled 
or an equitable peace is established in East Asia (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 
716)."

The Ambassador said that this formula clearly indicated that the 
stationing of Japanese troops in China was not of a permanent nature, 
and that however desirable the complete and immediate withdrawal of all 
Japanese troops from China might be, it was "impracticable under the 
present circumstances." In a written statement, which he then read, 
Ambassador Nomura said that as viewed from the Japanese side it seemed 
that the United States had remained adamant in its position and had 
shown little sign of reciprocation to "concessions" by the Japanese with 
the result that "in certain quarters in my country some skepticism has 
arisen as to the true intention of the United States Government." He 
continued:

"People in my country take the freezing of the assets as an economic 
blockade and they go even so far as to contend that the means of modern 
warfare are not limited to shooting. No nation can live without the 
supply of materials vital to its industries. Reports reaching me from 
home indicate that the situation is serious and pressing and the only 
way of preserving peace is to reach some kind of amicable and 
satisfactory understanding with the United States without any 
unnecessary loss of time. In the face of these mounting difficulties, 
the Japanese Government bent all its efforts to continue the 
conversations and bring about a satisfactory understanding solely for 
the purpose of maintaining peace in the Pacific. *My Government 
therefore is now submitting certain proposals as its utmost effort* for 
that purpose, and I shall feel very grateful if I can have the views of 
your Government on them at the earliest possible opportunity (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 717)."

In reply, President Roosevelt read a brief statement which concluded:

"We hope that our exploratory conversations will achieve favorable 
results in the way of providing a basis for negotiations. We shall 
continue to do our best to expedite the conversations just as we 
understand that the Japanese Government is anxious to do. We hope that 
the Japanese Government will make it clear that it intends to pursue 
peaceful courses instead of opposite courses, as such clarification 
should afford a way for arriving at the results which we seek (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 718)."

The President referred to the improvement of American relations with the 
South American countries under the "good neighbor policy" as compared to 
the policy of force that had been employed by the United States in some 
cases. Then, according to Ambassador Nomura's report to Tokyo the same 
day-

"Speaking on the remark I had made to the effect that economic pressure 
had aroused the ill feelings of the Japanese people and had made them 
impatient, the President said, "It is necessary to find a modus vivendi 
if the people are to live," and proceeded to explain that this 
expression should be translated as "method of living" (ex. 1, p. 116)."

Ambassador Nomura reported that it was not clear to him what the phrase 
"modus vivendi" really meant, and that he intended to ascertain whether 
the President was referring to, possibly, "a provisional agreement" (ex. 
1, p. 116).

Page 350             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Upon receipt of Ambassador Nomura's report, Foreign Minister Togo cabled 
the Ambassador that there were-

"indications that the United States is still not fully aware of the 
exceedingly criticalness of the situation here. *The fact remains that 
the date set forth in my message No. 736 is absolutely immovable under 
present conditions. It is a definite dead line and therefore it is 
essential that settlement be realized by about that time.* The session 
of Parliament opens on the 15th * * *. The government must have a clear 
picture of things to come, in presenting its case at the session. You 
can see, therefore, *that the situation is nearing a climax and that 
time is indeed becoming short.*

"I appreciate the fact that you are making strenuous efforts, but in 
view of the above-mentioned situation, will you redouble them? When 
talking to the Secretary of State and others, drive the points home to 
them. Do everything in your power to get a clear picture of the U. S. 
attitude in the minimum of time.  At the same time do everything in your 
power to have them give their speedy approval to our final proposal.

"We would appreciate being advised of your opinions on whether or not 
they will accept our final proposal A (ex. 1, pp. 116-117)."

Ambassador Nomura immediately cabled the Foreign Minister that Secretary 
Hull had agreed to study the Japanese proposals the following day, 
Armistice Day, and that his next meeting with the Secretary was 
scheduled for the afternoon of November 12 (Washington time) (ex. 1, p. 
118).

On November 11 (Japan time), as the result of statements made by Foreign 
Minister Togo to him on October 26 (Japan time) (ex. 1, p; 91), the 
British Ambassador in Tokyo, Sir Robert Craigie, called on the Foreign 
Minister upon instructions from the British Foreign Office and urged the 
desirability of a supreme effort to reach an agreement with the United 
States, saying that when the point of actual negotiations was reached 
the British Government would be ready to join in seeking an agreement 
(ex. 1, pp. 117-118; ex. 158). Secretary Hull was informed of the 
instructions to the British Ambassador in Tokyo during a conversation 
with Lord Halifax on November 12 (Washington time) (ex. 158). During the 
conversation between Foreign Minister Togo and Sir Robert Craigie, the 
Foreign Minister went to great lengths to convince the British 
Ambassador how critical the situation was, saying that in the view of 
the Japanese Government the negotiations had reached the final phase, 
that the Imperial Government had made its " maximum concessions," and 
that if the United States refused to accept those terms and sign the 
agreement "within a week to ten days," it would be "useless" to continue 
the negotiations, as the Japanese domestic political situation would 
permit "no further delays in reaching a decision." He emphasized this 
latter point in his report of the conversation to Ambassador Nomura, 
saving that it was "absolutely impossible that there be any further 
delays," that while there were indications that the United States 
Government was "still under the impression that the negotiations are in 
the preliminary stages and that we are still merely exchanging 
opinions," as far as Tokyo was concerned, "this is the final phase," and 
expressed the "fervent" hope that Ambassador Nomura would do- 

"everything in (his) power to make them realize this fact and bring 
about an agreement at the earliest possible moment (ex. 1, p. 119)."

At the meeting between Secretary Hull and Ambassador Nomura on November 
12 (Washington time), the Ambassador said that his new Government had 
asked him to emphasize its desire to expedite a 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 351

settlement because the internal situation in Japan was difficult, people 
were becoming impatient and a session of the Diet was impending. He 
expressed the hope that "within a week or ten days" some agreement could 
be reached. Secretary Hull commented that the matters submitted on 
November 10 were being worked on as rapidly as possible, and that as 
soon as a good basis had been reached in the exploratory conversations 
the United States could then approach the Chinese Government and sound 
out their attitude. He had previously handed to the Ambassador a 
document setting forth his general ideas relating to mutual conciliation 
between Japan and China. In response to a question from Minister 
Wakasugi, who was also present, Secretary Hull hinted that Japan and 
China might be "brought together" by the United States, but did not say 
in so many words that the United States would mediate between them. The 
conversation ended with Secretary Hull expressing the hope that he might 
have something by way of comment on the Japanese proposals on November 
14 (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 722-726). According to Ambassador Nomura's 
report to Tokyo, Secretary Hull also indicated that the British and the 
Dutch were being informed generally of the nature of the conversations, 
and that if a basis for negotiations should be worked out, it was 
possible that they might sign with the United States, although the 
Secretary "could not guarantee this" (ex. 1, p. 120). Ambassador Nomura 
told the Foreign Minister he was not "satisfied with their attitude 
toward taking up negotiations," and he sent Minister Wakasugi to see one 
of Mr. Hull's advisors the following day to press for an early decision. 
During that conversation, Mr. Wakusugi said that the public in Japan was 
becoming impatient "and almost desperate," and that he hoped for a 
clear-cut answer the next day as to whether the United States would 
accept or not the Japanese proposal of September 25 as modified through 
November 10, or desired changes therein, or whether the United States' 
proposal of June 21 was its final proposal (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 729-
731; ex. 1, pp. 123-125). Similar representations concerning the need 
for immediate agreement were made to Ambassador Grew on November 12 
(Japan time), including statements that the negotiations had reached 
their final phase, that Japan had made the greatest possible 
concessions, and that "a very critical and dangerous state of affairs 
will result should any appreciable delay be encountered in successfully 
concluding the negotiations" (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 719-722).

Secretary Hull testified that:

"during those early days in October, it looked more and more like they 
were prepared to, and were intending to, adhere to their policies * * * 
the situation floated along until Tojo's government came into power, 
about the 16th, I think, of October * * * and the Konoye Government 
fell.

"While they started out with a professed disposition to keep up the 
conversations, we could detect circumstances and facts indicative of 
duplicity and double dealing, and the real purpose was to go forward 
more energetically with their plans, as was indicated by numerous 
demands on us to make haste, and statements that this matter could not 
go on without something serious happening.

[Discontinuous text]

The impression we received, at least myself, and some others, was that 
during those months they tried to prevail on this Government by 
persuasion and threats and other methods to yield its basic principles, 
so that Japan could maintain intact her policy and her continued course 
of aggression and conquest (tr. 1178-1179) .
 
Page 352             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

On November 14 (Japan time), although he knew that Ambassador Nomura had 
scheduled a meeting with Secretary Hull for November 15 (Washington 
time) at which proposal "A" would be further discussed Foreign Minister 
Togo cabled the Ambassador the English text to be used in presenting 
proposal "B", and told the Ambassador he would be notified when to 
present that "absolutely final proposal" to the United States Government 
(ex. 1, pp. 125-126). This message was translated and available in 
Washington on November 14 (Washington time) (ex. 1, p. 126). The same 
day Ambassador Nomura cabled the Foreign Minister a long report (No. 
1090) in which, although he realized he would be "harshly criticized," 
he cautioned against precipitate action:

"I am telling Your Excellency this for your own information only.

"I believe that I will win out in the long run in these negotiations, 
and I will fight to the end. I will do my very best with infinite 
patience and then leave the outcome up to God Almighty. However, I must 
tell you the following:

"1. As I told you in a number of messages, the policy of the American 
Government in the Pacific is to stop any further moves on our part 
either southward or northward. With every economic weapon at their 
command, they have attempted to achieve this objective, and now they are 
contriving by every possible means to prepare for actual warfare.

2. In short, they are making every military and every other kind of 
preparation to prevent us from a thrust northward or a thrust southward; 
they are conspiring most actively with the nations concerned and rather 
than yield on this fundamental political policy of theirs in which they 
believe so firmly, they would not hesitate, I am sure, to fight us. It 
is not their intention, I know, to repeat such a thing as the Munich 
conference which took place several years ago and which turned out to be 
such a failure. Already I think the apex of German victories has been 
passed. Soviet resistance persists, and the possibility of a separate 
peace has receded, and hereafter this trend will be more and more in 
evidence.

"3. The United States is sealing ever-friendlier relations with China, 
and insofar as possible she is assisting Chiang. For the sake of peace 
in the Pacific, the United States would not favor us at the sacrifice of 
China. Therefore, the China problem might become the stumbling block to 
the pacification of the Pacific and as a result the possibility of the 
United States and Japan ever making up might vanish.

"4. There is also the question of whether the officials of the Japanese 
Government are tying up very intimately with the Axis or not. We are 
regarded as having a very flexible policy, ready, nevertheless, in any 
case, to stab the United States right in the back. Lately the newspapers 
are writing in a manner to show how gradually we are tying up closer and 
closer with the Axis.

"5. If we carry out a venture southward for the sake of our existence 
and our lives it naturally follows that we will have to fight England 
and the United States, and chances are also great that the Soviet will 
participate. Furthermore, among the neutral nations, those of Central 
America are already the puppets of the United States, and as for those 
of South America, whether they like it or not, they are dependent for 
their economic existence on the United States, and must maintain a 
neutrality partial thereto.

"6. It is inevitable that this war will be long, and this little victory 
or that little victory, or this little defeat or that little defeat do 
not amount to much, and it is not hard to see that whoever can hold out 
till the end will be the victor.

"7. It is true that the United States is gradually getting in deeper and 
deeper in the Atlantic, but this is merely a sort of convoy warfare, and 
as things now stand she might at any moment transfer her main strength 
to the Pacific.

"Great Britain, too, in the light of the present condition of the German 
and Italian Navies, has, without a doubt, moved considerable strength 
into the area of the Indian Ocean. I had expected in the past that 
should the United States start warlike activities in the Atlantic, there 
would be considerable feeling for a compromise in the Pacific, but there 
has been no evidence of such an inclination as yet. There are even now 
many arguments against war with Germany as opposed to internal 
questions, but there is not the slightest opposition to war in the 
Pacific. It is being thought more than ever that participation will be 
carried out through the Pacific area.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             353

"8. *Though I cannot be a hundred percent sure of the present situation 
in Japan, having read your successive wires I realize that the condition 
must be very critical. In spite of the fact that it is my understanding 
that the people and officials, too, are tightening their belts, I am 
going to pass on to you my opinion, even though I know that I will be 
harshly criticized for it. I feel that should the situation in Japan 
permit, I would like to caution patience for one or two months in order 
to get a clear view of the world situation. This, I believe, would be 
the best plan (ex. 1, pp. 127-129).*"

The Foreign Minister's reply came back promptly and unequivocally:

"For your Honor's own information.

1." I have read your #1090, and you may be sure that you have all my 
gratitude for the efforts you have put forth, but *the fate of our 
Empire hangs by the slender thread of a few days*, so please fight 
harder than you ever did before.

"2. What you say in the last paragraph of your message is, of course, so 
and I have given it already the fullest consideration, but I have only 
to refer you to the fundamental policy laid down in my #725. Will you 
please try to realize what that means. In your opinion we ought to wait 
and see what turn the war takes and remain patient. However, *I am 
awfully sorry to say that the situation renders this out of the 
question.* I set the deadline for the solution of these negotiations in 
my #736, and there *will be no change.* Please try to understand that. 
You see how short the time is; therefore, do not allow the United States 
to sidetrack us and delay the negotiations any further. Press them for a 
solution *on the basis of our proposals*, and do your best to bring 
about an immediate solution (ex. 1 p. 137-8).*

The next day, November 15 (Washington time), Ambassador Nomura called on 
Secretary Hull and the Secretary handed the Ambassador a statement, in 
writing, regarding the formula proposed by the Japanese Government on 
November 10 (Washington time) for dealing with the question of 
nondiscrimination in international trade. After noting that in its 
proposal, the Japanese Government recognized

"the principle of nondiscrimination in international commercial 
relations to be applied to all the Pacific areas, inclusive of China, 
*on the understanding that the principle in question is to be applied 
uniformly to the rest of the entire world as well* (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 
734),"

the statement suggested that the meaning of the condition attached by 
the Japanese was not entirely clear. It was assumed that the Japanese 
Government did not intend to ask the United States Government to accept 
responsibility for discriminatory practices in areas outside its 
sovereign jurisdiction, or to propose including in an arrangement with 
the United States a condition which could be fulfilled only with the 
consent and cooperation of all other governments. The statement then 
reviewed the efforts of the United States over recent gears to reduce 
tariff barriers, and suggested that similar action by Japan would be a 
"long forward step" toward the objective set forth in the Japanese 
proposal. The need for the proviso noted above was then questioned, and 
it was suggested that the proviso might well be omitted. The statement 
was accompanied by a draft of a proposed joint United States-Japanese 
declaration on economic policy, which Secretary Hull told Minister 
Wakasugi constituted the United States reply to the Japanese proposal on 
the question of nondiscrimination in international trade (ex. 29, vol. 
II, pp. 731-737).

Ambassador Nomura then stated that his Government regarded the 
conversations as having progressed to the stage of formal negotiations. 
In reply to this, Secretary Hull said that until the conversations had 
reached a point where he could call in the British, the Chinese, and the 
Dutch and say that there was a basis for negotiation, the conversations 
were exploratory. He pointed out that whereas the United States proposal 
of June 21 made it clear that the settlement under discussion related to 
the entire Pacific area, the proposal the

Page 354             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

previous Japanese Government had submitted on September 27 narrowed the 
application of the proposals regarding economic nondiscrimination and 
peaceful intent to the southwestern Pacific, and he then requested that 
the new Japanese Government give assurances on that point. He said that 
it would be difficult for him to go to the British and the Dutch and say 
that Japan was willing to enter upon a peaceful program but at the same 
time desired to adhere to a fighting alliance with Germany. The 
Secretary said that if the United States made an agreement with Japan 
while Japan had an outstanding obligation to Germany which might call 
upon Japan to go to war with us, this would cause "so much turmoil in 
the country that he might be lynched." He asked the Ambassador whether 
the United States Government could assume that if the Japanese 
Government entered into an agreement with it the Tripartite Pact would 
become a "dead letter." When Mr. Wakasugi inquired whether this was an 
answer to the Japanese proposal on the question of Japan's relations 
under the Tripartite Pact, Secretary Hull said the United States would 
be better able to reply after receiving an answer to the question he had 
just raised. Ambassador Nomura said he was afraid the American 
Government did not trust the Japanese Government, though there was no 
material difference between the policies of the new Government and the 
previous Government. Secretary Hull said that the new Japanese 
Government seemed to be taking the attitude that the United States 
Government must reply "at once" to their points, and that he did not 
think that his Government-

"should be receiving ultimatums of such a character from the Japanese 
Government under circumstances where the United States had been pursuing 
peaceful courses throughout and the Japanese Government had been 
violating law and order (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 734)."

He concluded by saying that when he had heard further from the new 
Japanese Government regarding its peaceful intentions, and when the 
question of nondiscrimination could be cleared up as suggested in the 
proposals he had handed to Ambassador Nomura during the meeting, and 
also in regard to the Tripartite Pact, he believed that some solution 
could be reached on the question of stationing troops in China. The 
Secretary emphasized at the same time that he did not desire any delay 
and that he was working as hard as he could to bring about a wholly 
satisfactory and broad settlement. It was agreed that there should be a 
further meeting after Ambassador Nomura had received instructions from 
his Government (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 731-734; ex. 1, p. 132).

In his report of this meeting to Tokyo, Ambassador Nomura said that he 
had told Mr. Hull he felt his Government would be "very disappointed" 
over these replies. He continued:    -1

"Today's talks can be boiled down to the fact that the United States did 
clarify their attitude on the trade question. On the other two problems, 
although we agree in principle, we differ on interpretations. They 
harbor deep doubts as to the sincerity of our peaceful intentions and 
apparently they view the China situation through those eyes of suspicion 
(ex. 1, p. 137)."

There is no evidence before the Committee indicating that at that time 
Ambassador Nomura had any knowledge that the Japanese naval striking 
force had already started assembling for the attack on Pearl Harbor.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK              Page 355

[**THE TOJO CABINET REFUSES TO CONSIDER ANY SUGGESTION LESS FAVORABLE TO JAPAN THAN ITS "ABSOLUTELY FINAL PROPOSAL"**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 18-19,1941)**

Ambassador Kurusu reached Washington on November 15 (Washington time) 
(tr. 1133). On the morning of November 17 (Washington time), with 
Ambassador Nomura, he called on Secretary Hull prior to their meeting 
with President Roosevelt. After he had been  introduced, Ambassador 
Kurusu said, among other things, that he was fully assured of Premier 
Tojo's desire to reach a peaceful settlement with the United States, and 
that Premier Tojo was optimistic regarding the possibility of settling 
the differences in respect to nondiscrimination in international trade 
and Japan's attitude toward the European war, but felt that there were 
greater difficulties in the question of withdrawing Japanese troops from 
China. Before the meeting with President Roosevelt, Ambassador Nomura 
handed Secretary Hull two documents which he said the Japanese 
Government was submitting in response to the questions that had been 
raised at the conference on November 12 regarding Japan's peaceful 
intentions and the scope of the proposed understanding between the two 
Governments (ex. 29, vol. It, pp. 738-739).

At the meeting at the White House, Ambassador Kurusu was formally 
received by President Roosevelt. The conversation was largely devoted to 
a discussion of the relation of Japan and the United States to the war 
in Europe and to the China problem. Concerning the latter the President 
said that at a suitable stage the United States would, so to speak, 
"introduce" Japan and China to each other and tell them to proceed with 
the remaining adjustments, the Pacific questions having already been 
determined. Secretary Hull explained at length that America's military 
preparations were for defense before it was too late, that the United 
States was on the defense in the present Pacific situation and that 
Japan was the aggressor. The conference ended with the understanding 
that both Ambassadors would see Secretary Hull the next morning (ex. 29, 
vol. II, pp. 740-743).

At that meeting at the White House no effort was made by either side to 
solve the three major points of difference between the two countries, 
and there is no evidence before the Committee of any contact between 
representatives of the two Governments on the afternoon of November 17 
(Washington time). However, as Ambassador Nomura reported to Tokyo the 
next day (No. 1135), that evening the two Japanese Ambassadors "went to 
call on a certain Cabinet member." "This," they cabled the Foreign 
Minister, "is what he told us":

"The President is very desirous of an understanding between Japan and 
the United States. In his latest speech he showed that he entertained no 
ill will towards Japan. I would call that to your attention. Now the 
great majority of the cabinet members, with two exceptions, in principle 
approve of a Japanese American understanding. If Japan would now do 
something real, such as evacuating French Indo-China, showing her 
peaceful intentions, the way would be open for us to furnish you with 
oil and it would probably lead to the re-establishment of normal trade 
relations. The Secretary of State cannot bring public opinion in line so 
long as you do not take some real and definite steps to reassure the 
Americans (ex. 1, p. 154)."

 
356             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

There are indications in the record before the Committee that this
meeting between the two Japanese Ambassadors and a member of
President Roosevelt's Cabinet on the evening before their meeting
with Secretary Hull was more than a coincidence. Under Secretary
Welles testified before the Committee in another connection that he
had been told by Secretary Hull "and other individuals" that Mr.
Frank Walker, then Postmaster General and as such a member of
President Roosevelt's Cabinet, was "negotiating" with the Japanese
and that he thought Mr. Walker "had conversations both with Admiral
Nomura and later, when Kurusu was here, with him, as well" (tr.
1319-1320). Furthermore, the record of outside telephone calls
through the White House switchboard shows that at 6:25 p. m. on
November 17, before the meeting of the two Japanese Ambassadors
with the "certain Cabinet member," Postmaster General Walker
talked with Secretary Hull, and that he also talked with Secretary
Hull at 9:22 o'clock the next morning, November 18 (Washington
time), before Secretary Hull's conference at 10:30 o'clock with the
two Ambassadors (ex. 179).

The suggestion made that evening by the Cabinet member-that
some action by Japan to show her peaceful intentions, "such as 
evacuating French Indochina," would open the way for the United States 
to
relax its freezing orders-was substantially the proposal made by the
two Ambassadors to Secretary Hull at their meeting with him at 10:30
the next morning. While at that meeting the greatest emphasis was
placed on the question of Japan's obligations under the Tripartite
Pact, during the discussion of this subject, after Secretary Hull had
pointed out that the American public would never understand an
agreement between Japan and the United States if Japan continued
to adhere to the Tripartite Pact, Ambassador Nomura said that the
situation in the southwest Pacific was now critical, with the United
States and Great Britain reinforcing their armed forces in Singapore
and the Philippine Islands to counter Japan's sending troops to
French Indochina. He suggested that if this situation could now be
checked, if the tension could be relaxed, an atmosphere could be
created in which the talks could continue. Ambassador Kurusu then
said that the freezing regulations had caused impatience in Japan and
a feeling that Japan had to fight while it could; he said that what was
needed now was to do something to enable Japan to change its course.
Secretary Hull asked to what extent a relaxation of freezing would
enable ,Japan to adopt peaceful policies. He explained that-

"what he had in mind was to enable the peaceful leaders in Japan to get 
control of the situation in Japan and to assert their influence."

Ambassador Nomura then asked whether there was any hope of a
solution-some small beginning toward the realization of "our high
ideals"-and continued by suggesting:

"*the possibility of going back to the status which existed before the 
date in July when following the Japanese move into southern French 
Indochina, our freezing measures were put into effect.* [1] The 
Secretary said that if we should make some modifications in our embargo 
on the strength of a step by Japan such as the Ambassador had
mentioned we do not know whether the troops which have been withdrawn 
from
French Indochina will be diverted to some equally objectionable movement
elsewhere. The Ambassador said that what he had in mind was simply some
move toward arresting the dangerous trend in our relations. *The 
Secretary said

[1] While the Japanese move that precipitated the United States freezing 
order was into *southern* French Indochina, Japanese troops had moved 
into northern French Indochina in 1940.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 357

that it would be difficult for him to get this Government to go a long 
way in removing the embargo unless this Government believed that Japan 
was definitely started on a peaceful course and had renounced purposes 
of conquest.* The Ambassador said that the Japanese were tired of 
fighting China and that Japan would go as far as it could along a first 
step. The Secretary said that he would consult with the British and the 
Dutch to see what their attitude would be toward the suggestion offered 
by the Japanese Ambassador (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 750)."

Ambassadors Nomura and Kurusu pursued their suggestion further
at a conference with Secretary Hull the next day, November 19
(Washington time). Ambassador Nomura told the Secretary that
they had reported to their Government the conversation of the
preceding day and were momentarily expecting instructions.

"The Secretary then asked how the Ambassador (Nomura) felt about the 
possibilities. *The Ambassador said that yesterday he had made the 
suggestion in regard to a restoration of the status which prevailed 
before the Japanese moved into south Indochina in the latter part of 
July because he felt that, as this action had precipitated our freezing 
measures which in turn had reacted in Japan to increase the tension, if 
something could be done on his suggestion, it could serve to relieve 
that tension and tend to create a better atmosphere in our relations.* 
The Secretary asked whether the Ambassador contemplated that if a 
proposal such as the Ambassador had suggested were carried out we would 
go on with the conversations. The Ambassador replied in the affirmative. 
The Secretary expressed the view that this might enable the leaders in 
Japan to hold their ground and organize public opinion in favor of a 
peaceful course. He said that he recognized that this might take some 
time.

"The Ambassador said that what was in his mind was that both sides now 
appeared to be preparing for eventualities and that nevertheless the 
Japanese desired a quick settlement, especially in view of our freezing 
measures. The Secretary said that he presumed that the Ambassador had in 
mind, in connection with the continuation of our conversations, further 
efforts to iron out the important points on which our views had not so 
far diverged. The Ambassador agreed (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 751)."

In reporting to Tokyo on November 18 (Washington time) the
substance of their conversation with Secretary Hull on that day, the
two Japanese Ambassadors had, in fact, dispatched four separate
telegrams (ex. 1, pp. 146, 149, 151, 152), each of which outlined the
suggestion they had made, thereby indicating the importance the two
Ambassadors attached to it. The sending of four telegrams may also
have reflected the fact that they had already received from the Foreign
Minister the English text of proposal "B", which was far more drastic
than their suggestion and was, they knew, regarded in Tokyo as
Japan's "absolutely final proposal." Furthermore, they had been
told by the Foreign Minister that they would be notified when to
present it to Secretary Hull. The two final telegrams show that both
Japanese Ambassadors regarded a return to the status prior to freezing
as the only means to success in the negotiations. In his message
(No. 1133) Ambassador Kurusu said:

"In view of the internal situation in our country, although I think 
there will be difficulties to be met in trying to reach a settlement in 
harmony with the wishes of the Americans, I feel that *as a stopgap for 
the present, we should ask them to consider our strong desires for a 
"time limit" in connection with the conclusion of such a Japanese-
American agreement and for the purpose of breaking the present deadlock, 
ask them for the removal at once of the freezing act and also for 
assurance regarding imports of a specified amount of oil.*

"*In the conference of the 18th both Ambassador Nomura and I suggested 
the resumption of the status quo prior to 24 July*, but in view of the 
progress of negotiations thus far, the Americans will likely not consent 
to this merely for our agreeing to not forcefully invade any territory 
aside from French Indo-China as per Proposal "B" or for our promise in 
vague terms of evacuation of troops from French Indo-China * * * Please 
have your mind made up to this. I desire instructions re "time limit" 
and * * * as we desire to press for a

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

speedy settlement, please give consideration to the above and advise at 
once (ex. 1, pp. 151-152)."

In his message (No. 1134) to the Foreign Minister Ambassador Nomura 
outlined at greater length what he and Ambassador Kurusu had in mind:

"In our conversations of today, *as a practical means of alleviating the 
ever worsening front with which we are faced and to quiet the fearful 
situation, as well as, to bring about a return to the situation existing 
before the application of the freezing legislation, we suggested the 
evacuation of Japanese troops stationed in the southern part of French 
Indo-China.

"Hull, showing considerable reluctance replied, "After Japan had clearly 
demonstrated her intentions to be peaceful I will confer with Britain, 
the Netherlands and other interested powers."

"In the past it would seem that the greatest stumbling block for the 
American authorities was the question of our troops of occupation in 
China. Recently, however, the United States, what with her internal 
situation and, especially insofar as it concerns the revision of the 
Neutrality Agreement, her increasing involvement in the war in the 
Atlantic, seems to have undergone a change. She is now, rather, 
exhibiting a tendency to lay more emphasis on Japan's peace plans 
insofar as they pertain to the Tri-Partite Alliance. With regard to 
other questions, too, it seems very clear that they are of a mind to 
bring about a compromise after making sure of our peaceful intentions. 
In view of these circumstances, as a result of our deliberations of 
successive days it would seem that should we present Proposal "B" 
immediately, an understanding would be more difficult to realize than if 
we went on with our discussions of Proposal "A". *Therefore, looking at 
it from a practical point of view, we are of the opinion that prior to 
presenting of Proposal "B" it would be more advisable to reach a 
practical settlement, principally on the questions of the acquisition of 
goods and the cancellation of the freezing legislation mentioned in 
Proposal "B", and then to try to proceed with the solution of other 
questions on this basis. Unless we follow this course we are convinced 
that an immediate solution will be extremely difficult.*

[Discontinuous text]

"The United States, of course, has indicated clearly that she is not 
interested in mere promises as much as she is in putting said promises 
in effect. *It is necessary, therefore, for us to be prepared to 
withdraw our troops as soon as the freezing order is rescinded and 
materials are made available to us.*"

"Please advise us as to your intentions after perusing my message #1133 
(ex. 1, pp. 152-3)."

The temporary arrangement suggested by the two Japanese Ambassadors was 
summarily rejected by the Japanese Government in Tokyo. On November 19 
(Japan time), in a message in which he referred to the Ambassadors' 
messages No. 1133 and No. 1134 above, Foreign Minister Togo emphasized 
that in the negotiations consent could be given only "within the scope 
of the instructions of this office." He told Ambassador Nomura that-

"the internal situation in our country is such *that it would be 
difficult for us to handle it if we withdraw from Southern French Indo-
China, merely on assurances that conditions prior to this freezing act 
will be restored. It would be necessary to have a proposed solution that 
would come up to the B proposal.* With the situation as urgent as it is 
now, it is of utmost importance that you play your hand for the 
amelioration of the situation, to the extent of the proposal in your 
message, then to push on for an understanding.

"*The Ambassador (Kurusu) did not arrange this with us beforehand, but 
made the proposal contained in your message for the purpose of meeting 
the tense situation existing within the nation, but this can only result 
in delay and failure in the negotiations. The Ambassador, therefore, 
having received our revised instructions, (after reading our #797, 800 
and 801) will please present our B proposal of the Imperial Government, 
and no further concessions can be made.*

*If the U. S. consent to this cannot be secured, the negotiations will 
have to be broken off*; therefore, with the above well in mind put forth 
your very best efforts (ex. 1, p. 155).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 359

Ambassador Nomura immediately cabled the Foreign Minister in Tokyo his 
astonishment at the Japanese Government's unwillingness to consider 
seriously the suggestion he and Ambassador Kurusu had made. His message 
(No. 1136), dated November 19 (Washington time) follows in full:

"I know that it is beyond our powers to imagine the anxiety felt by the 
Cabinet leaders who bear the heavy responsibility of saving the nation 
and succoring the people at this time when relations between Japan and 
the United States have now at last reached the point of cruciality. 
There are now three ways which the Empire might take

"(1) Maintain the status quo.
"(2) Break the present deadlock by an advance under force of arms.
"(3) Devise some means for bringing about a mutual non-aggression 
     arrangement.

"No. 1 would mean that both sides would continue to increase war 
preparations and send out larger fleets of war vessels bringing about a 
state where only a contact would be needed to start a conflagration. In 
other words this would finally result in an armed clash and it differs 
from No. 2 only in the matter of the longer or shorter time involved.

"No. 3 would mean finding some provisional arrangement by which the 
present deadlock might be broken, and at the same time attaining our 
objectives under the peace for which we have been striving. *My #1134 of 
yesterday was sent with this purpose in mind. The displeasure felt by 
the government is beyond my power of comprehension*, but as I view it, 
the present, after exhausting our strength by four years of the China 
incident following right upon the Manchuria incident, is hardly an 
opportune time for venturing upon another long drawn out warfare on a 
large scale. *I think that it would be better to fix up a temporary 
"truce" now in the spirit of "give and take" and make this the prelude 
to greater achievements to come later.*

"I am thus frankly setting before you my humble opinion as supplementary 
to my message of yesterday (ex. 1, p. 158)."

In a separate message Ambassador Nomura requested the Foreign Minister 
to "convey the above (message) to the Prime Minister" (ex. 1, p. 158).

In reply to this Foreign Minister Togo cabled Ambassador Nomura
on November 20 (Japan time) that:

"under the circumstances here, we regret that *the plan suggested by 
you, as we have stated in our message, would not suffice for saving the 
present situation.*"

"We see no prospects for breaking the deadlock *except for you to push 
negotiations immediately along the lines of the latter part of our 
#798.* Please understand this.  *The Premier also is absolutely in 
accord with this opinion* (ex. 1, p. 160)."

Message No. 798 referred to in the next preceding paragraph was the 
message the Foreign Minister had sent on November 19 (Japan time) which 
rejected Ambassador Nomura's suggestion for a "provisional arrangement" 
and instructed him to present proposal "B," the Japanese Government's 
"absolutely final proposal."

Foreign Minister Togo's message of November 20 (Japan time), which thus 
finally and conclusively rejected the suggestion made by Ambassadors 
Nomura and Kurusu, was sent not only after the Foreign Minister had 
received the Ambassadors' four telegrams of November 18 (Washington 
time), including No. 1133 and No. 1134 quoted in part above, but also 
after the Foreign Minister had received Ambassador Nomura's message No. 
1135 of the same date, reporting on the meeting of the two Ambassadors 
with the member of President Roosevelt's Cabinet on the evening of 
November 17 (Washington time). Consequently, the record before the 
committee shows that the Japanese Government, including Premier Tojo, 
refused to consider the provisional arrangement suggested by Ambassadors 
Nomura and

Page 360               PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Kurusu with knowledge not only that Secretary Hull had agreed to discuss 
it with the British and the Dutch-thus indicating, in the light of his 
prior statements, that he believed a basis for negotiations had been 
suggested by the two Ambassadors-but with the further knowledge that 
practically the same suggestion had been made to Ambassadors Nomura and 
Kurusu by a member of President Roosevelt's Cabinet.

The seriousness with which the Japanese Government regarded the stage 
that had now been reached in the negotiations is evidenced by the fact 
that on November 15 (Japan time), the Japanese Foreign Office sent out a 
circular message to its officials abroad, including those in Washington, 
prescribing "the order and method of destroying the code machines in the 
event of an emergency" (ex. 1, p. 137). Four days later the Foreign 
Office sent out circular messages establishing the so-called "winds 
code," to be used in case of an emergency and the cutting off of 
international communications. The receipt of a message implementing this 
code was to be the signal to "destroy all code papers, etc." (Ex. 1, pp. 
154-155). Those two messages were sent from Tokyo before Japan's 
"absolutely final proposal" was presented to Secretary Hull, and appear 
to have been the first Japanese messages intercepted which dealt with 
the destruction of codes, code machines, et cetera.

[**JAPAN DELIVERS ITS ABSOLUTELY FINAL PROPOSAL TO THE UNITED STATES AND DEMANDS AN AGREEMENT ON THAT BASIS**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 20, 1941)**

On November 20 (Washington time), Thanksgiving Day, Ambassadors Nomura 
and Kurusu called at the State Department. Ambassador Kurusu told 
Secretary Hull that they had referred to their Government the suggestion 
Ambassador Nomura had made at the meeting 2 days before for a return to 
the status which prevailed prior to the Japanese move into southern 
French Indochina in July. He said that both he and Ambassador Nomura had 
anticipated that the Japanese Government might perceive difficulty in 
moving troops out of Indochina in short order, but that nevertheless the 
Japanese Government was now prepared to offer a proposal "on that 
basis." He said that the Japanese proposal represented an amplification 
of the suggestion Ambassador Nomura had made (ex. 29 vol. II, p. 753).

The proposal which Ambassador Kurusu then read and handed to Secretary 
Hull was the second formula, proposal "B," approved at the Imperial 
Conference in Tokyo on November 5 (Japan time) as a "last effort to 
prevent something happening." In his messages to Ambassador Nomura, 
Foreign Minister Togo had described it as "an ultimatum" (ex. 1, p. 99), 
as "our absolutely final proposal" (ex. 1, p. 99), and as "our last 
possible bargain" (ex. 1, p. 93). As originally drawn up and approved, 
proposal "B" had consisted of four provisions, each of which was 
contained in the Japanese proposal of November 20 (ex. 1, pp. 97,99; ex. 
29, vol. II, pp. 755-756). "If necessary," those four provisions were to 
be supplemented by others dealing with the three points previously at 
issue in the conversations-i. e., the evacuation of troops from China 
and French Indochina, the Tripartite Pact, and nondiscrimination in 
international trade. In the English text of proposal "B" cabled to 
Ambassador Nomura on November 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 361

14 (Japan time), specific provisions covering those three points were 
added to the original four provisions (ex. 1, p. 126). However, the 
Foreign Minister's instructions to Ambassador Nomura on November 19 
(Japan time) to present proposal "B" had also directed him to delete the 
provisions dealing with nondiscrimination in international trade and the 
Tripartite Pact, leaving only the provision relating to evacuation of 
troops in addition to the four provisions approved on November 5 (Japan 
time) (ex. 1, p. 156). But whereas the formula concerning the evacuation 
of troops which Ambassador Nomura had presented to Secretary Hull on 
November 7 (Washington time) had covered the evacuation of Japanese 
troops from both China and French Indochina, the provision contained in 
the Japanese proposal of November 20 covered the evacuation of Japanese 
troops from French Indochina only. To this, possibly with an eye to the 
suggestion made by Ambassador Nomura to Secretary Hull on November 18, 
the Japanese Government had added a provision for the transfer of their 
troops from southern French Indochina to northern French Indochina "upon 
the conclusion of the present arrangement." [1]

As read and delivered to Secretary Hull by Ambassador Kurusu, the 
Japanese proposal follows in full:

"1. Both the Governments of Japan and the United States undertake not to 
make any armed advancement into any of the regions in the Southeastern 
Asia and the Southern Pacific area excepting the part of French Indo-
China where the Japanese troops are stationed at present

"2. The Japanese Government undertakes to withdraw its troops now 
stationed in French Indo-China upon either the restoration (If peace 
between Japan and China or the establishment of an equitable peace in 
the Pacific area.
"In the meantime the Government of Japan declares that it is prepared to 
remove its troops now stationed in the southern part of French Indo-
China to the northern part of the said territory upon the conclusion of 
the present arrangement which shall later be embodied in the final 
agreement.

"3. The Government of Japan and the United States shall cooperate with a 
view to securing the acquisition of those goods and commodities which 
the two countries need in Netherlands East Indies.

"4. The Governments of Japan and the United States mutually undertake to 
restore their commercial relations to those prevailing prior to the 
freezing of the assets.
"The Government of the United States shall supply Japan a required 
quantity of oil.

"5. The Government of the United States undertakes to refrain from such 
measures and actions as will be prejudicial to the endeavors for the 
restoration of general peace between Japan and China (ex. 29, vol. II, 
pp. 755-756).

When Ambassador Kurusu handed the Japanese proposal to him Secretary 
Hull said that he would examine and study it sympathetically. Secretary 
Hull referred to the fact that the United States was supplying aid to 
both Great Britain and China, and indicated that until Japan made it 
perfectly clear that her policy was one of peace it would be impossible 
to cease aiding China. However Ambassador Kurusu observed in connection 
with paragraph 5 of the proposal that it "might be interpreted to mean 
that American aid to China would be discontinued as from the time that 
negotiations were started."  (Ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 753-755.)

In his testimony before the Committee Secretary Hull summarized the 
Japanese note of November 20 in these words:

[1] Secretary Hull testified that the conditional offer of the Japanese 
"to withdraw troops from southern Indochina to northern Indochina was 
meaningless as they could have brought those troops back to southern 
Indochina within a day or two and furthermore they placed no limit on 
the number of troops they might continue to send there." (Tr. ;4261.)

Page 362                   PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"The plan thus offered called for the supplying by the United States to 
Japan of as much oil as Japan might require, for suspension of freezing 
measures, for discontinuance by the United States of aid to China and 
for withdrawal of moral and material support from the recognized Chinese 
government. It contained a provision that Japan would shift her armed 
forces from southern Indochina to northern Indochina, but placed no 
limit on the number of armed forces which Japan might send into 
Indochina and made no provision for withdrawal of those forces until 
after either the restoration of peace between Japan and China or the 
establishment of an "equitable" peace in the Pacific area. While there 
were stipulations against further extension of Japan's armed force into 
southeastern Asia and the southern Pacific (except Indochina), there 
were no provisions which would have prevented continued or fresh 
Japanese aggressive activities in any of the regions of Asia lying to 
the north of Indochina-for example, China and the Soviet Union. The 
proposal contained no Provision pledging Japan to abandon aggression and 
to revert to peaceful courses (tr. 1137-38)."

It is now known that the Japanese note of November 20, was in fact, a 
restatement in more peremptory terms of Japan's "minimum demands" 
determined at the Imperial Conference in Tokyo on September 6 (Japan 
time). As applied to the United States, the three major Japanese 
"demands" decided upon at that Imperial Conference were, that the United 
States would not "intervene in or obstruct a settlement by Japan of the 
China Incident", i. e., would cease all aid to China; that the United 
States would "take no action in the Far East which offers a threat to 
the defense of the Empire"; and that the United States would " cooperate 
with Japan in her attempt to obtain needed raw materials" (ex. 179, 
Konoye Memoirs, pp. 77-78). In an intercepted message to Ambassador 
Nomura which was translated and available in Washington on November 24 
(Washington time), Foreign Minister Togo said:

"our demand for a cessation of aid to Chiang (the acquisition of 
Netherlands Indies goods and at the same time the supply of American 
petroleum to Japan as well) is a most essential condition (ex. 1, p. 
172)."

Secretary Hull testified that the Japanese must have known that their 
proposal was-

"an utterly impossible proposal for us, in the light of our 4 or 5 years 
exploration of each others situations and attitudes (tr. 1181)."

He continued-

"To have accepted the Japanese proposal of November 20 was clearly 
unthinkable.  It would have made the United States an ally of Japan in 
Japan's program of conquest and aggression and of collaboration with 
Hitler. It would have meant yielding to the Japanese demand that the 
United States abandon its principles and policies.  It would have meant 
abject surrender of our position under intimidation (tr. 1140)."

Secretary Hull and President Roosevelt, as well as other high officials 
of the Government, not only knew from the intercepted Japanese messages 
already mentioned that the note the Japanese delivered on Thanksgiving 
Day, November 20, was their "absolutely final proposal," they also knew 
from the same source that the Japanese Government had fixed November 25 
(Japan time) as the dead line by which the written agreement of the 
United States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands to its demands were to 
be obtained. On November 22 (Washington time), the following intercepted 
message from Foreign Minister Togo to Ambassador Nomura was translated 
and available in Washington:

"It is awfully hard for us to consider changing the date we set in my 
#736 (November 25). You should know this, however, I know you are 
working hard. Stick"

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 363

"to our fixed policy and do your very best. Spare no efforts and try to 
bring about the solution we desire. *There are reasons beyond your 
ability to guess why we wanted to settle Japanese-American relations by 
the 26th, but if within the next three or four days you can finish your 
conversations with the Americans; if the signing can be completed by the 
29th, (let me write it out for you-twenty-ninth); if the pertinent notes 
can be exchanged; if we can get an understanding with Great Britain and 
the Netherlands; and in short if everything can be finished, we have 
decided to wait until that date. This time we mean it that the dead line 
absolutely cannot be changed. After that things are automatically going 
to happen.* Please take this into your careful consideration and work 
harder than you ever have before (ex. 1, p. 165)."

Even with four added days of grace, the situation was, Secretary Hull 
testified,

"critical and virtually hopeless. On the one hand our Government desired 
to exhaust all possibilities of finding a means to a peaceful solution 
and to avert or delay an armed clash, especially as the heads of this 
country's armed forces continued to emphasize the need for time to 
prepare for resistance. On the other hand, Japan was calling for a show-
down.

"There the situation stood-the Japanese unyielding and intimidating in 
their demands and we standing firmly for our principles.

"The chances of meeting the crisis by diplomacy had practically 
vanished. We had reached the point of clutching at straws (tr. 1140)."

Neither Secretary Hull nor President Roosevelt, nor any of their 
advisors, knew, however, that almost simultaneously with the delivery in 
Washington of the Japanese ultimatum of November 20, the Imperial 
Japanese General Headquarters in Tokyo had ordered the commander in 
chief of the Japanese combined fleet to direct the Japanese naval 
striking force, already assembling in a harbor in northern Japan, to 
"advance to the area in which they are to wait in readiness" for the 
attack on Pearl Harbor (tr. 437).

[**THE UNITED STATES REPLIES**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 26, 1941)**

The United States reply was handed to Ambassadors Nomura and Kurusu in 
the late afternoon on November 26 (Washington time), 6 days after the 
delivery of the Japanese ultimatum (tr. 1147). Those 6 days were a 
period of intense activity, involving not only the highest officials in 
the United States Government but also the highest officials of the 
British, Dutch, Australian, and Chinese Governments.

From time to time Secretary Hull had told the Japanese Ambassadors that 
when his conversations with them got beyond the exploratory stage he 
would talk with the representatives of the British, Dutch, and Chinese 
Governments. On November 18 (Washington time), after the Japanese 
Ambassadors suggested a return to the status prior to the freezing 
orders in July, Secretary Hull told them he would consult the British 
and the Dutch to see what their attitude would be (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 
750). Immediately after that conference, Secretary Hull requested the 
British Minister, Sir Ronald Campbell, to call on him. Secretary Hull's 
memorandum of his conversation with the Minister is as follows:

"I said that I had engaged in a lengthy conference with the two ranking 
Japanese representatives, including Mr. Kurusu, who is here for the 
purpose of carrying on conversations with this Government. I added that 
the conversation related to the question of a proposed peaceful 
settlement for the Pacific area. I stated that nothing was agreed upon 
at this meeting and that the discussion included the subject of two 
opposing policies-of conquest by force on the one hand and a

364             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

policy of peace, law, and order on the other. I went on to say that the 
three main points on which we have encountered serious difficulties in 
former conversations with Ambassador Nomura, namely, the bringing of 
Japanese troops out of China, the Tripartite Pact and certain phases of 
commercial policy, were discussed at length; but that the Japanese made 
no concessions on the troop matter or on the matter of the Tripartite 
Pact. I told the Minister that the Japanese finally inquired whether a 
brief temporary partial arrangement could not be worked out that would 
enable them to improve public sentiment in Japan along the lines of 
peace rather than of military action. This would also include the idea 
of Japan's coming out of China. They said while the United States and 
maybe Great Britain and the Netherlands East Indies, if they should be 
so disposed on consultation, would to a partial extent relax embargoes 
on exports to Japan, Japan on its part would correspondingly take steps 
in the direction of a peaceful policy and in organizing and educating 
its public opinion in support of such a policy during the next few 
months. The Japanese suggested further that the whole question of a 
general peaceful settlement for the Pacific area would be gradually 
developed and public opinion in Japan would enable them to meet us more 
satisfactorily themselves, and presumably satisfactorily to us, on the 
more difficult questions such as removing their troops from China and 
the Tripartite Pact. They did not, however, make any definite 
commitments as to just how far they could comply with our position with 
respect to these two points."

"I said to the British Minister that I had made it clear to the Japanese 
that if their Government cared to present something on this point. I 
would give it consideration in the event it appeared to be feasible of 
consideration, but that I could make no promise, and that if it should 
be deemed feasible, I would confer with the British, the Dutch, the 
Chinese and the Australians about any phase of the matter in which they 
would be interested to which they would give consideration. I also said 
to the Japanese that, of course, unless Japan decides on a peaceful 
policy rather than a policy of force and conquest, we could not get far 
in any kind of discussion but that I could understand why they might 
need a little time to educate public opinion, as stated (ex. 168)."

The next day the Australian and Netherlands Ministers called separately 
on Secretary Hull, at his request, and to each he gave the substance of 
his talk with the British Minister (ex. 168).

Before turning to a discussion of the preparation of the United States' 
reply to the Japanese note of November 20, it is important to recall 
briefly the evidence before the Committee of the consideration given 
earlier in November to-

"the possibility of reaching some stop-gap arrangement with the Japanese 
to tide over the immediate critical situation and thus to prevent a 
breakdown in the conversations, and even perhaps to pave the way for a 
subsequent general agreement (Hull, tr. 1128)."

At the Joint Board meeting on November 3 (Washington time) which 
followed the conferences called by Secretary Hull to determine whether 
"the military authorities would be prepared to support further warnings" 
by the United States to Japan as urged by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, 
General Marshall had expressed the view that-

"the basis of U. S. policy should be to make certain minor concessions 
which the Japanese could use in saving face. These concessions might be 
a relaxation on oil restrictions or on similar trade restrictions (ex. 
16)."

The Joint Board had decided that the War and Navy Departments would 
prepare a memorandum for President Roosevelt which would, among other 
things, oppose the issuance of an ultimatum to Japan as urged by the 
Generalissimo advocate State Department action to put off hostilities 
with Japan as long as possible, and suggest that an agreement be made 
with Japan to tide the situation over for the next several months. 
However, the joint memorandum which General Marshall and Admiral Stark 
actually submitted to President Roosevelt on November 5 contained only 
the first of the Joint Board's

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 365

recommendations; no reference was made in the memorandum to the second 
or third points recommended by the Board and mentioned above (ex. 16).

The day after the Marshall-Stark joint memorandum was given to President 
Roosevelt, Secretary of War Stimson-

"had an hour's talk alone with the President with regard to the Far 
Eastern situation and his approaching conference with Kurusu, who was 
coming from Japan.  The thing uppermost in his mind was how to gain more 
time (tr. 14386-14387)."

In his notes of that talk with the President, Mr. Stimson recorded:

"The President outlined what he thought he might say. *He was trying to 
think of something which would give us further time.* He suggested that 
he might propose a truce in which there would be no movement of armament 
for 6 months and then if the Japanese and Chinese had not settled their 
arrangement in that meanwhile, we could go on on the same basis (tr.; 
14414)."

At the Cabinet meeting the next day, November 7, the President had heard 
Secretary Hull's estimate of the situation in the Far East and had 
polled the Cabinet as already described (tr. 14415). On November 10, 
during his talk with Ambassador Nomura, the President had made reference 
to a "*modus vivendi*," and after this meeting, in his report to Tokyo, 
Ambassador Nomura had said he intended to find out whether the President 
referred to "possibly, a provisional agreement" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 
718; ex. 1, p. 11G).  Again, in his report to Tokyo of the meeting with 
President Roosevelt on November 17, Ambassador Nomura had commented 
that, in connection with a remark by the President that the United 
States desired to preserve peace in the Pacific,

"I could see that he was outlining some formula in his mind (ex. 1, p. 
139)."

It was on the evening of the same day that the two Japanese Ambassadors 
had called on a member of the President's Cabinet and had been told that 
the President "was very desirous of an understanding between Japan and 
the United States," and if Japan would do something real to show her 
peaceful intent, "such as evacuating French Indo-China," the way would 
be open "for us to furnish you with oil and it would probably lead to 
the re-establishment of normal trade relations" (ex. 1, p. 154).

Exhibit 18 before the Committee includes the following undated, penciled 
memorandum in President Roosevelt's handwriting:

"6 months

"1. U. S. To resume economic relations-some oil and rice now-more later.

"2. Japan to send no more troops to Indo-China or Manchurian border or 
any place South (Dutch, Brit. or Siam).

"3 Japan to agree not to invoke tripartite pact if U. S. gets into 
European war.

"4 U. S. to *introduce* Japs to Chinese to talk things over but U. S. to 
take no part in their conversations.

"Later on Pacific agreements. (Ex. 18). [Italics in original.]"

Attached to the President's memorandum, which was obtained from the 
files of the State Department, is a cover sheet on which appears the 
following typewritten note: "Pencilled memorandum given by the President 
to the Secretary of State (not dated but probably written shortly after 
November 20, 1941)" (ex. 18). However, the fact that the memorandum 
suggests only that Japan should not be permitted to send "more troops to 
Indochina or Manchurian Border," whereas by November 18 the Japanese 
Ambassadors were suggesting to Secre-

Page 366             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

tary Hull the withdrawal of Japanese troops from at least southern 
French Indochina, would seem to indicate that the memorandum may have 
been written by the President before the latter date.

Likewise, since early in November the State Department had been giving 
intensive study to the possibility of reaching some stopgap arrangement, 
knowing that-

"The presentation to the Japanese of a proposal which would serve to 
keep alive the conversations would also give our Army and Navy time to 
prepare and to expose Japan's bad faith if it did not accept. We 
considered every kind of suggestion we could find which might help or 
keep alive the conversations and at the same time be consistent with the 
integrity of American principles (Hull, tr. 1128)."

Two of those suggestions were used in preparing the United States' reply 
to the Japanese note of November 20. On November 11 (Washington time), 
the Far Eastern Division of the State Department had submitted to 
Secretary Hull a draft of a proposal intended to serve as a-

"transitional arrangement the very discussion of which might serve not 
only to continue the conversations pending the advent of a more 
favorable situation, even if the proposal is not eventually agreed to, 
but also to provide the entering wedge toward a comprehensive settlement 
of the nature sought providing the proposal is accepted by Japan and 
provided further that China is able to obtain satisfactory terms from 
Japan (ex. 18)."

This draft proposal consisted of two parts, the first of which contained 
a statement of principles and mutual pledges with respect to economic 
relations which followed closelythe lines of the counterproposals made 
to the Japanese on several prior occasions beginning in April. The
second part contemplated immediate Japanese-Chinese negotiations during 
which there would be an armistice between those countries and the United 
States would hold in abeyance the shipment of supplies of a military 
character to China and Japan would not increase or supply its military 
forces in China and French Indochina. Upon the conclusion of a peace 
settlement between Japan and China the United States was to negotiate 
with both China and Japan for the resumption of normal trade relations 
(ex. 18).

On November 18 (Washington time), Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau 
sent to President Roosevelt and Secretary Hull a draft of a proposed 
comprehensive settlement between Japan and the United States (ex. 168). 
This draft was revised in the Far Eastern Division of the State 
Department the same day and copies of the revised draft entitled 
"Outline of Proposed Basis for Agreement Between the United States and 
Japan," were sent at once to General Marshall and Admiral Stark for 
their consideration (ex. 18). As revised, the proposal set forth in 
summary form various steps "proposed" to be taken by the United States 
and Japanese Governments, respectively (ex. 18). The evidence before the 
Committee shows that on the same day, November 19, Secretary Hull had 
two meetings with Admiral Schuirmann, through whom the State Department 
maintained liaison with the Navy Department (tr. 1173), and that a 
conference attended by Admiral Stark for the Navy Department and by 
General Gerow for the War Department (General Marshall was out of town) 
was held at the State Department on the morning of November 21 
(Washington time) at which the "Outline" was discussed. At that 
conference Secretary Hull requested both Admiral Stark and General Gerow 
to

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         Page 367

submit their comments on the "Outline" from the military and navaI 
standpoint (ex. 18).

This they did the afternoon of the same day, November 21 
(Washington.time). In his memorandum General Gerow said that he believed 
General Marshall would concur in the views which he expressed concerning 
the "Outline" and advised Secretary Hull that on the basis of a hasty 
study War Plans Division saw "no objection to its use as a basis for 
discussion." He said that-

"the adoption of its provisions would attain *one of our present major 
objectives-the avoidance of war with Japan.* Even a temporary peaee in 
the Pacific would permit us to complete defensive preparations in the 
Philippines and at the same time insure continuance of material 
assistanee to the British-both of which are highly important.

"The foregoing should not be construed as suggesting strict adherence to 
all the conditions outlined in the proposed agreement. *War Plans 
Division wishes to emphasize it is of grave importance to the suceess of 
our war effort in Europe that we reach a *modus vivendi* with Japan* 
(ex. 18)."

General Gerow suggested the deletion from the "Outline" of a provision 
which would require Japan to withdraw all Japanese troops from Manchuria 
except for a few divisions necessary as a police force, provided Russia 
withdrew all her troops from her far eastern front except for an 
equivalent remainder, on the ground that such a provision would probably 
be unacceptable to Russia. He requested that the War Department be given 
an opportunity to consider the military aspects of any major changes 
that might be made in the proposal (ex. 18).

In his memorandum, Admiral Stark objected to provisions in the "Outline" 
which would place limitations on American naval forces in Pacific 
waters, commit the United States to use its influence toward causing 
Great Britain to cede Hong Kong to China, and require Japan to sell to 
the United States a specified tonnage of merchant vessels. He agreed 
with General Gerow that the provision concerning the withdrawal of 
Japanese troops in Manchuria should be deleted. He made several 
suggestions regarding the phrasing of other provisions, and ended his 
memorandum with the comment that while the provisions of the "Outline" 
might be assumed to abrogate the Tripartite Pact on the part of Japan, 
it would be helpful if that could be specifically stated (ex. 18).

The following day, November 22 (Washington time), there was completed in 
the State Department the first draft of a counterproposal in reply to 
the Japanese note of November 20. This draft counterproposal was in two 
sections. The first section contained a proposed *modus vivendi*. As an 
alternative to the Japanese proposals of November 20, and was prefaced 
by a brief statement of the circumstances leading to its preparation. 
Revised drafts of this section were prepared on November 24 and 25. From 
November 22 to November 26 the *modus vivendi* project was discussed and 
given intensive consideration within the State Department, by President 
Roosevelt and by the highest authorities of the Army and Navy, including 
Secretaries Stimson and Knox and General Marshall and Admiral Stark. The 
*modus vivendi* was also discussed with the British, Australian, 
Chinese, and Dutch Governments, principally through their diplomatic 
representatives in Washington. Such revisions as were made in the 
original draft of this section are discussed 

Page 368             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

in connection with the final draft of November 25, which is set forth in 
full below.

The second section of the November 22 draft consisted of two parts. The 
first part contained the statement of principles and mutual pledges with 
respect to economic relations which had been prepared by the State 
Department's Far Eastern Division on November 11.  The second part was 
based primarily upon the "Outline" sent by the State Department to the 
War and Navy Departments on November 19, modified, however, in 
accordance with the suggestions made by Admiral Stark and General Gerow 
in their memoranda of November 21 to Secretary Hull mentioned above. The 
changes made in this section in the succeeding drafts of November 24 and 
November 25 were few in number and, as so modified, this section became 
the reply to the Japanese note of November 20 which was handed by 
Secretary Hull to the Japanese Ambassadors on November 26 (Washington 
time).  Secretary Hull testified that all who saw the *modus vivendi* 
section also saw the section which became the United States reply of 
November 26 (tr. 14363).

The final, November 25 (Washington time), draft of the *modus vivendi* 
section was as follows:

"The representatives of the Government of the United States and of the 
Government of Japan have been carrying on during the past several months 
informal and exploratory conversations for the purpose of arriving at a 
settlement if possible of questions relating to the entire Pacific area 
based upon the principles of peace, law and order, and fair dealing 
among nations. These principles include the principle of inviolability 
of territorial integrity and sovereignty of each and all nations; the 
principle of non interference in the internal affairs of other 
countries; the principle of equality, including equality of commercial 
opportunity and treatment; and the principle of reliance upon 
international cooperation and conciliation for the prevention and 
pacific settlement of controversies and for improvement of international 
conditions by peaceful methods and processes.

"It is believed that in our discussions some progress has been made in 
reference to the general principles which constitute the basis of a 
peaceful settlement covering the entire Pacific area. Recently the 
Japanese Ambassador has stated that the Japanese Government is desirous 
of continuing the conversations directed toward a comprehensive and 
peaceful settlement in the Pacific area; that it would be helpful toward 
creating an atmosphere favorable to the successful outcome of the 
conversations if a temporary *modus vivendi* could be agreed upon to be 
in effect while the conversations looking to a peaceful settlement in 
the Pacific were continuing; and that it would be desirable that such 
*modus vivendi* include as one of its provisions some initial and 
temporary steps of a reciprocal character in the resumption of trade and 
normal intercourse between Japan and the United States.

"*On November 20 the Japanese Ambassador communicated to the Secretary 
of State proposals in regard to temporary measures to be taken 
respectively by the Government of Japan and by the Government of the 
United States, which measures are understood to have been designed to 
accomplish the purposes above indicated. These proposals contain 
features which, in the opinion of this Government, conflict with the 
fundamental principles which form a part of the general settlement under 
consideration and to which each Government has declared that it is 
committed.*

"The Government of the United States is earnestly desirous to contribute 
to the promotion and maintenance of peace in the Pacific area and to 
afford every opportunity for the continuance of discussions with the 
Japanese Government directed toward working out a broad-gauge program of 
peace throughout the Pacific area. With these ends in view, the 
Government of the United States offers for the consideration of the 
Japanese Government an alternative suggestion for a temporary *modus 
vivendi*, as follows: 

"MODUS VIVENDI

"1. The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan, 
both being solicitous for the peace of the Pacific, affirm that their 
national policies are directed toward lasting and extensive peace 
throughout the Pacific area and that they have no territorial designs 
therein.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 369

"2. They undertake reciprocally not to make from regions in which they 
have military establishments any advance by force or threat of force 
into any areas in Southeastern or Northeastern Asia or in the southern 
or the northern Pacific area.

"3. The Japanese Government undertakes forthwith to withdraw its armed 
forces now stationed in southern French Indochina and not to replace 
those forces; to reduce the total of its forces in French Indochina to 
the number there on July 26, 1941; and not to send additional naval, 
land or air forces to Indochina for replacements or otherwise.

"The provisions of the foregoing paragraph are without prejudice to the 
position of the Government of the United States with regard to the 
presence of foreign troops in that area.

"4. The Government of the United States undertakes forthwith to modify 
the application of its existing freezing and export restrictions to the 
extent necessary to permit the following resumption of trade between the 
United States and Japan in articles for the use and needs of their 
peoples:

"(a) Imports from Japan to be freely permitted and the proceeds of the 
sale thereof to be paid into a clearing account to be used for the 
purchase of the exports from the United States listed below, and at 
Japan's option for the payment of interest and principal of Japanese 
obligations within the United States, provided that at least two-thirds 
in value of such imports per month consist of raw silk.  It is 
understood that all American-owned goods now in Japan the movement of 
which in transit to the United States has been interrupted following the 
adoption of freezing measures shall be forwarded forthwith to the United 
States. 

"(b) Exports from the United States to Japan to be permitted as follows:
    (i) Bunkers and supplies for vessels engaged in the trade here 
        provided for and for such other vessels engaged in other trades 
        as the two Governments may agree
   (ii) Food and food products from the United States subject to such 
        limitations as the appropriate authorities may prescribe in 
        respect of commodities in short supply in the United States.
  (iii) Raw cotton from the United States to the extent of $600,000 in 
        value per month.
   (iv) Medical and pharmaceutical supplies subject to such limitations 
        as the appropriate authorities may prescribe in respect of 
        commodities in short supply in the United States.
    (v) Petroleum. The United States will permit the export to Japan of 
        petroleum, within the categories permitted general export, upon 
        a monthly basis for civilian needs. The proportionate amount of 
        petroleum to be exported from the United States for such needs 
        will be determined after consultation with the British and the 
        Dutch Governments. It is understood that by civilian needs in 
        Japan is meant such purposes as the operation of the fishing 
        industry, the transport system, lighting, heating, industrial 
        and agricultural uses, and other civilian uses.
   (vi) The above-stated amounts of exports may be increased and 
        additional commodities added by agreement between the two 
        governments as it may appear to them that the operation of this 
        agreement is furthering the peaceful and equitable solution of 
        outstanding problems in the Pacific area.

"5. The Government of Japan undertakes forthwith to modify the 
application of its existing freezing and export restrictions to the 
extent necessary to permit the resumption of trade between Japan and the 
United States as provided for in paragraph four above.

"6. The Government of the United States undertakes forthwith to approach 
the Australian, British and Dutch Governments with a view to those  
Governments' taking measures similar to those provided for in paragraph 
four above.

"7. With reference to the current hostilities between Japan and China, 
the fundamental interest of the Government of the United States in 
reference to any discussions which may be entered into between the 
Japanese and the Chinese Governments is simply that these discussions 
and any settlement reached as a result thereof be based upon and 
exemplify the fundamental principles of peace, law, order and justice, 
which constitute the central spirit of the current conversations between 
the Government of Japan and the Government of the United States and 
which are applicable uniformly throughout the Pacific area.

"8. This *modus vivendi* shall remain in force for a period of three 
months with the understanding that the two parties shall confer at the 
instance of either to ascertain whether the prospects of reaching a 
peaceful settlement covering the entire Pacific area justify an 
extension of the *modus vivendi* for a further period (Ex. 18.)"

Comparison of this final draft of the *modus vivendi* section and the 
prior drafts of November 22 and November 24 shows that paragraphs

Page 370                PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 above were contained in each draft and remained the 
same in substance throughout, with but few changes in text. In paragraph 
3, the final draft added the proviso contained in the second sentence 
and omitted specific mention of a limitation of 25,000 upon the total 
number of Japanese troops to remain in French Indochina, retaining from 
the prior drafts, however, the limitation expressed in terms of "the 
number there on July 26,1941." Paragraph 4 was the same in both the 
final draft and the draft of November 24, but differed from the 
corresponding provision in the November 22 draft, which had been as 
follows:

"The Government of the United States undertakes forthwith to remove the 
freezing restrictions which were placed on Japanese assets in the United 
States on July 26 and the Japanese Government agrees simultaneously to 
remove the freezing measures which it imposed in regard to American 
assets in Japan. Exports from each country would thereafter remain 
subject to the respective export control measures which each country may 
have in effect for reasons of national defense (ex. 18)."

During the 5 days from November 22 to November 26, inclusive, the State 
Department was the focal point of great activity. After the preparation 
of the November 22 draft of the *modus vivendi* and in accordance with 
his conversations with the British Minister on November 18 and the 
Netherlands and Australian Ministers on November 19, on Saturday, 
November 22 (Washington time), Secretary Hull arranged a meeting at the 
State Department with Lord Halifax, the British Ambassador; Dr. Hu Shih, 
the Chinese Ambassador; Dr. A. Loudon, the Netherlands Minister; and Mr. 
Richard G. Casey, the Australian Minister. His report of that meeting 
follows in full:

"The British Ambassador, the Australian Minister, and the Netherlands 
Minister called at my request, the Chinese Ambassador joining us later 
on. I enumerated the high points in the conversations which I have been 
carrying on with the Japanese officials here since the spring of this 
year. They are fully set forth in records of my conversations during 
that time and need not be repeated here.

"I concluded with an account of the Japanese proposal for a *modus 
vivendi*, I showed it to them to read, with the exception of the Chinese 
Ambassador who had not yet arrived, and then proceeded to outline my 
proposed reply in the nature of a substitute for the Japanese proposal. 
There seemed to be general agreement that a substitute was more 
desirable than a specific reply to the Japanese proposal, section for 
section. The substitute reply was substantially what is contained in the 
present final draft, which I am considering handing to the Japanese. 
Each of the gentlemen present seemed to be well pleased with this 
preliminary report to them, except the Chinese Ambassador, who was 
somewhat disturbed, as he always is when any question concerning China 
arises not entirely to his way of thinking. This reaction on his part is 
very natural. He did not show serious concern in view of the provision 
in our proposed *modus vivendi* which would block a Japanese attack on 
China in order to destroy the Burma Road. He inquired whether this would 
commit the Japanese not to further invade China during the coming three 
months, to which I replied in the negative, adding that this was a 
question to be decided under the permanent agreement now receiving 
attention. I made it clear that this proposal was made by the Japanese 
and that there was probably not one chance in three that they would 
accept our reply even though it does provide that this proposed 
temporary arrangement constitutes a part of the general conversations 
looking toward a general agreement on the basic questions (ex. 18)."

Secretary Hull's memoranda of his subsequent conversations with those 
who attended this meeting show that each of them immediately reported to 
their respective Governments, for comment, the terms of the Japanese 
note of November 20 to the United States and of the November 22 draft of 
the proposed *modus vivendi* (ex. 18)."

Later that day, November 22, Ambassadors Nomura and Kurusu called on 
Secretary Hull. The Secretary told them that he had 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK               Page 371

talked with the representatives of the other Governments mentioned 
above, and

"that there had been a discussion of the question of whether things 
(meaning Japanese peaceful pledges, et cetera) could be developed in 
such a way that there could be a relaxation to some extent of freezing. 
The Secretary said that these representatives were interested in the 
suggestion and there was a general feeling that the matter could all be 
settled if the Japanese could give us some satisfactory evidences that 
their intentions were peaceful.

"The Secretary said that in discussing the situation with the 
representatives of these other countries he found that there had arisen 
in their minds the same kind of misgivings that had troubled him in the 
course of the conversations with the Japanese Ambassador. He referred to 
the position in which the Japanese Government had left the Ambassador 
and the Secretary as they were talking of peace when it made its move 
last July into Indochina. He referred also to the mounting oil purchases 
by Japan last Spring when the conversations were in progress, to the 
fact that he had endured public criticism for permitting those shipments 
because he did not wish to prejudice a successful outcome to the 
conversations and to the fact that that oil was not used for normal 
civilian consumption.

"The Secretary went on to say that the Japanese press which is adopting 
a threatening tone gives him no encouragement and that no Japanese 
statesmen are talking about a peaceful course whereas in the American 
press advocacy of a peaceful course can always get a hearing. He asked 
why was there not some Japanese statesmen backing the two Ambassadors by 
preaching peace. The Secretary pointed out that if the United States and 
other countries should see Japan coming along a peaceful course there 
would be no question about Japan's obtaining all the materials she 
desired, that the Japanese Government knows that.

"The Secretary said that while no decisions were reached today in regard 
to the Japanese proposals he felt that we would consider helping Japan 
out on oil for civilian requirements only as soon as the Japanese 
Government could assert control of the situation in Japan as it relates 
to the policy of force and conquest. He said that if the Ambassador 
could give him any further assurances in regard to Japan's peaceful 
intentions it would help the Secretary in talking with senators and 
other persons in this country (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 757-758)."

Later, Secretary Hull commented that Japan made it very difficult by 
leaving troops in Indochina. Ambassador Kurusu replied-

"that the Japanese desired the troops in northern Indo-China in order to 
bring about a settlement with China. He said that after the settlement 
of the China affair Japan promised to bring the troops out of Indo-China 
altogether.

"The Secretary emphasized again that he could not consider this, that 
also uneasiness would prevail as long as the troops remained in Indo-
China, and commented that Japan wanted the United States to do all the 
pushing toward bringing about a peaceful settlement; that they should 
get out of Indo-China.

"Mr. Kurusu observed that the Japanese Foreign Minister had told 
Ambassador Grew that we seemed to expect that all the concessions should 
be made by the Japanese side (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 760)."

After further discussion of the troop situation in Indochina. Ambassador 
Nomura pressed Secretary Hull for an answer to the Japanese proposal of 
November 20. In reply, the Secretary said-

"that if the Japanese could not wait until Monday before having his 
answer there was nothing he could do about it as he was obliged to 
confer again with the representatives of the other governments concerned 
after they had had an opportunity to consult with their governments. He 
repeated that we were doing our best, but emphasized that unless the 
Japanese were able to do a little there was no use in talking (ex. 29, 
vol. II, p. 761)."

Ambassador Nomura "disclaimed any desire to press the Secretary too hard 
for an answer * * * and said that the Japanese would be quite ready to 
wait until Monday" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 761). Ambassador Nomura sent two 
reports of this meeting to Tokyo (ex. 1, pp. 167-169,170-171), in one of 
which he observed:

Page 372             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"We (Japanese Ambassadors) kept a calm appearance throughout the talk, 
and at no time became excited, and the opponent's attitude was also the 
same (ex. 1, p. 171)."

The two Ambassadors did not meet with Secretary Hull again until 
Wednesday afternoon, November 26 (Washington time), when the Secretary 
gave them the United States reply (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 764-770) .

There is no evidence before the Committee of any meetings or conferences 
outside the State Department regarding the *modus vivendi* the next day, 
Sunday, November 23 (Washington time).  However, Monday, November 24 
(Washington time), like the preceding Saturday, was a day of great 
activity. A new draft of the entire counterproposal was completed in the 
Department over the weekend (ex. 18). During the early part of the 
afternoon Secretary Hull had telephone conversations with Secretary 
Stimson and Secretary Knox, as well as a conference with Admiral 
Schuirmann (tr. 1166). At 3:30 p. M., Secretary Hull had a conference at 
the State Department with General Marshall and Admiral Stark, at which 
the new draft was discussed in detail (tr. 1166; ex. 18). During this 
conference General Marshall expressed the opinion that 25,000 Japanese 
troops in French Indo-China, the maximum permitted under the current 
draft of the *modus vivendi*, would not be a menace (ex. 18). Following 
his conference with General Marshall and Admiral Stark at the State 
Department, Lord Halifax, Dr. Hu Shih, Dr. Loudon, and Mr. Casey called 
on Secretary Hull at his request, and to each of them he handed copies 
of the latest draft of the *modus vivendi*. The Secretary's memorandum 
of that meeting records that they spent an hour reading the draft and 
taking notes to send back to their Governments. The memorandum 
continues:

"The Chinese Ambassador objected to more than a maximum of 5,000 
Japanese troops being left in Indochina. I again stated that General 
Marshall had a few minutes before expressed to me his opinion that 
25,000 troops would be no menace and that, while this Government did not 
recognize the right of Japan to keep a single soldier in Indochina, we 
were striving to reach this proposed temporary agreement primarily 
because the heads of our Army and Navy often emphasize to me that time 
is the all-important question for them, and that it is necessary to be 
more fully prepared to deal effectively with the situation in the 
Pacific area in case of an outbreak by Japan. I also emphasized the 
point that, even if we agree that the chances of such an outbreak are 
not great, it must be admitted that there are real possibilities that 
such an outbreak may soon occur-any day after this week-unless a 
temporary arrangement is effected that will cause the agitated state of 
public opinion to become more quiet and thereby make it much more 
practicable to continue the conversations relative to the general 
agreement.

"The Chinese Ambassador dwelt on the matter of reducing the proposed 
figure of 25,000 soldiers to remain in Indochina to 5,000. I pointed out 
and each of the representatives understood the great advantage it would 
be to our five countries to have Japan committed to a peaceful course 
for three months and set forth the advantages to each of having 
additional time in which to make further preparations, et ectera, et 
ectera. They seemed to be very much gratified. They seemed to be 
thinking of the advantages to be derived without any particular thought 
of what we should pay for them, if anything. Finally, when I discovered 
that none of their governments had given them instructions relative to 
this phase of the matter, except in the case of the Netherlands 
Minister, I remarked that each of their Governments was more interested 
in the defense of that area of the world than this country, and at the 
same time they expected this country, in case of a Japanese outbreak, to 
be ready to move in a military way and take the lead in defending the 
entire area. And yet I said their Governments, through some sort of 
preoccupation in other directions, do not seem to know anything about 
these phases of the questions under discussion. I made it clear that I 
was definitely disappointed at these unexpected developments, at the 
lack of interest and

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 373

lack of a disposition to cooperate. They said nothing except the 
Netherlands Minister who then replied that he had heard from his 
Government and that it would support the *modus vivendi* proposal. I 
then indicated that I was not sure that I would present it to the 
Japanese Ambassador without knowing anything about the views and 
attitude of their Governments. The meeting broke up in this fashion (ex. 
18)."

Later that day Secretary Hull sent to President Roosevelt a draft of a 
proposed message from the President to Prime Minister Churchill.  The 
proposed message summarized the Japanese note of November 20, saying 
that the Japanese Ambassador had "represented" that the conclusion of 
such a "modus vivendi" might give the Japanese Government opportunity to 
develop public sentiment in Japan in support of a liberal and 
comprehensive program of peace covering the Pacific area and that "the 
domestic political situation in Japan was so acute as to render urgent 
some relief such as was envisaged in the proposal."  The message pointed 
out that the Japanese proposal "would apparently not exclude advancement 
into China from Indo-China " It went on to say that the United States 
Government proposed to inform the Japanese Government that in its 
opinion the Japanese proposals contained features "not in harmony with 
the fundamental principles which underlie the proposed general 
settlement" to which each Government had declared that it was committed, 
and then summarized the terms of the *modus vivendi* which was being 
considered by the United States Government as an alternative proposal. 
The message advised the Prime Minister that the British Ambassador in 
Washington had been informed and was informing the British Foreign 
Minister (ex. 18). President Roosevelt returned the draft message to 
Secretary Hull with the notation "O. K., see addition. F. D. R." (Ex. 
18). The "addition" referred to by the President was the following 
sentence which he had written in longhand for insertion at the end of 
the message:

"This seems to me a fair proposition for the Japanese but its acceptance 
or rejection is really a matter of internal Japanese politics. I am not 
very hopeful and we must all be prepared for real trouble, possibly soon 
(ex. 18)."

The message, with the sentence added by the President, was sent to the 
Prime Minister at 11 p. m. That evening, November 24 (Washington time), 
through Ambassador Winant in London (ex. 18).

The next day, Tuesday, November 25 (Washington time), the draft 
counterproposal was once more revised in the State Department. This was 
the final revision of the section containing the *modus vivendi*. At 
9:30 a. M. Secretary Stimson and Secretary Knox met with Secretary Hull 
at the State Department for their "usual Tuesday morning meeting" (tr. 
14,390), which Secretary Stimson described in his notes:

"Hull showed us the proposal for a three months' truce, which he was 
going to lay before the Japanese today or tomorrow. It adequately 
safeguarded all our interests, I thought as we read it, but I don't 
think there is any chance of the Japanese accepting it, because it was 
so drastic. In return for the propositions which they were to do; 
namely, to at once evacuate and at once to stop all preparations or 
threats of action, and to take no aggressive action against any of her 
neighbors, etc., we were to give them open trade in sufficient 
quantities only for their civilian population. This restriction was 
particularly applicable to oil.  We had a long talk over the general 
situation (tr. 14,417-14,418)."

It is clear that Secretary Stimson's description of the *modus vivendi* 
as "so drastic" refers to the limited nature of the trade concessions to 
be made by the United States under it.

Page 374               PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

At noon that day the so-called "War Council" composed of President 
Roosevelt, Secretaries Hull, Stimson, and Knox, and General Marshall and 
Admiral Stark met at the White House. The discussion centered on the 
Japanese situation. According to Secretary Stimson's notes, the 
President

"brought up the event that we were likely to be attacked perhaps (as 
soon as) next .Monday, for the Japanese are notorious for making an 
attack without warning, and the question was what we should do. The 
question was how we should maneuver them into the position of firing the 
first shot without allowing too much danger to ourselves. [1] It was a 
difficult proposition. Hull laid out his general broad propositions on 
which the thing should be rested-the freedom of the seas and the fact 
that Japan was in alliance with Hitler and was carrying out his policy 
of world aggression. The others brought out the fact that any such 
expedition to the South as the Japanese were likely to take would be an 
encirclement of our interests in the Philippines and cutting into our 
vital supplies of rubber from Malaysia. I pointed out to the President 
that he had already taken the first steps toward an ultimatum in 
notifying Japan way back last summer that if she crossed the border into 
Thailand she was violating our safety and that therefore he had only to 
point out (to Japan) that to follow any such expedition was a violation 
of a warning we had already given. So Hull is to go to work on preparing 
that (tr. 14,418-14,419)."

In addition to Secretary Hull's testimony regarding this meeting (tr. 
1144), the record before the Committee contains a copy of a letter 
written by the Secretary to the Roberts Commission a little over a month 
after the meeting. In that letter, after stating that at the meeting of 
the War Council on November 25, as well as the meeting on November 28, 
he had "emphasized the critical nature" of the relations between the 
United States and Japan, the Secretary continued:

"I stated to the conference that there was practically no possibility of 
an agreement being achieved with Japan; that in my opinion the Japanese 
were likely to break out at any time with new acts of conquest by force; 
and that the matter of safeguarding our national security was in the 
hands of the Army and the Navy.  At the conclusion I with due deference 
expressed my judgment that any plans for our military defense should 
include an assumption that the Japanese might make the element of 
surprise a central point in their strategy and also might attack at 
various points simultaneously with a view to demoralizing efforts of 
defense and of coordination for purposes thereof (ex. 174)."

General Marshall testified that he had "a very distinct recollection of 
Mr. Hull's saying at one of those meetings, one of the last, 'These 
fellows mean to fight; you will have to be prepared" (tr. 3079).

Admiral Stark, who attended the War Council meeting on November 25, 
added a postscript concerning it to a letter of that date which he sent 
to Admiral Kimmel at Pearl Harbor. In the postscript, he described the 
comments of the President and the Secretary of State:

"I held this up pending a meeting with the President and Mr. Hull today. 
I have been in constant touch with Mr. Hull and it was only after a long 
talk with him that I sent the message to you a day or two ago showing 
the gravity of the situation. He confirmed it all in today's meeting, as 
did the President. Neither would be surprised over a Japanese surprise 
attack (ex. 100)."

After the meeting at the White House, Secretary Hull returned to the 
State Department and Secretary Stimson to the War Department.  Secretary 
Stimson recorded in his notes:

[1] With reference to this sentence in Secretary Stimson's notes, 
General Marshall testified: "* * * they were trying to arrange a 
diplomatic procedure, rather than firing of a gun, that would not only 
protect our interests, by arranging matters so that the Japanese 
couldn't intrude any further in a dangerous way, but also anything they 
did do, they would be forced to take the offensive action, and what we 
were to do had to be prepared for the President by Mr. Hull. It was not 
a military order. It was not a military arrangement" (tr. 13801).

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 375

"When I got back to the Department I found news from G-2 that an (a 
Japanese) expedition had started. Five Divisions have come down from 
Shantung and Shansi to Shanghai and there they had embarked on ships-30, 
40, or 50 ships-and have been sighted south of Formosa. I at once called 
up Hull and told him about it and sent copies to him and to the 
President of the menace from G-2 (tr. 14419)."

Secretary Hull's record of telephone calls shows a call on that day from 
Secretary Stimson at 4:30 p. m. (tr. 1166), and the record of outside 
telephone calls through the White House switchboard shows such a call at 
4:25 p. m. and that the call was completed (tr. 5545).  The latter 
record also shows that Postmaster General Walker telephoned Secretary 
Hull four times that afternoon (tr. 5545-5546). The first call was at 
12:27 p. M., while the meeting at the White House was in progress, and 
was not completed. The other calls, which were completed, were at 
3:30,4:05, and 5:30 p. m.

In the meantime reports were reaching Washington of the reactions of the 
Chinese, Dutch, and British Governments to the terms of the proposed 
*modus vivendi*. As noted above, the Netherlands Minister informed 
Secretary Hull at the conference on the afternoon of November 24 
(Washington time) that his Government would support the *modus vivendi* 
proposal. The next day the Minister formally transmitted to Secretary 
Hull his Government's comments on the Japanese note of November 20 and 
the proposed *modus vivendi* (tr. 4471-4474).  The comments of the 
British Foreign Secretary, Sir Anthony Eden, were contained in a 
memorandum handed to Secretary Hull on the same day by Lord Halifax, the 
British Ambassador (ex. 18). That memorandum expressed the willingness 
of the British Foreign Office to leave to Secretary Hull the decision 
whether to reject the Japanese proposals or make a counterproposal. It 
took the position that the Japanese proposals should be regarded " as 
the opening movement in a process of bargaining," and suggested that if 
a counterproposal should be made, "our demands should be pitched high 
and our price low." On this basis it was suggested "for the 
consideration of the United States Government" that any counterproposal-

"should stipulate for the total withdrawal from Indo-China not merely of 
the Japanese "troops" as in the Japanese proposal but of Japanese naval, 
military and air forces with their equipment and for the *suspension of 
further military* advances in China in addition to satisfactory 
assurances regarding other areas in South East Asia, the Southern 
Pacific and Russia; the quid pro quo being legitimate relaxation of 
existing economic measures so as to allow the export of limited 
quantities of goods to ensure the welfare of the Japanese civilian 
population, but excluding goods of direct importance to the war 
potential, in particular oil, of which we know the Japanese have no 
shortage except for military purposes. These relaxations would of course 
only become effective as and when withdrawal of Japanese armed forces 
took place, and we should expect in return to receive goods of a similar 
nature from Japan if we required them.

"Mr. Hull has of course made it perfectly clear to the Japanese that any 
interim arrangement is only a first step in a wider settlement which 
must be in conformity with basic principles acceptable to the United 
States. We feel that to prevent misrepresentation by Japan it will have 
to be made public that any interim agreement is purely provisional and 
is only concluded to facilitate negotiation of an ultimate agreement on 
more fundamental issues satisfactory to all parties concerned (ex. 18). 
(Italics in original.)"

Prime Minister Churchill's reply to President Roosevelt's message of 
November 24 reached the State Department early on the morning of 
November 26 (ex. 23). In it the Prime Minister said:

"Your message about Japan received tonight. Also full accounts from Lord 
Halifax of discussions and your counter project to Japan on which 
Foreign"

Page 376             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Secretary has sent some comments. Of course, it is for you to handle 
this business and we certainly do not want an additional war. There is 
only one point that disquiets us. What about Chiang Kai Shek? Is he not 
having a very thin diet? Our anxiety is about China. If they collapse 
our joint dangers would enormously increase. We are sure that the regard 
of the United States for the Chinese cause will govern your action. We 
feel that the Japanese are most unsure of themselves (ex. 23)."

The views of the Chinese Government had already been made known to the 
United States Government. The Chinese Foreign Minister, to whom on 
November 22 the Chinese Ambassador in Washington had cabled the 
substance of the Japanese note of November 20 and the proposed *modus 
vivendi*, sent the following message to the Chinese Ambassador on 
November 24:

"After reading your telegram, the Generalissimo showed strong reaction. 
He got the impression that the United States Government has put aside 
the Chinese question in its conversations with Japan instead of seeking 
a solution, and is still inclined to appease Japan at the expense of 
China. * * * We are * * * firmly opposed to any measure which may have 
the effect of increasing China's difficulty in her war of resistance, or 
of strengthening Japan's power in her aggression against China. Please 
inform the Secretary of State (ex. 18)."

On November 25, Owen Lattimore, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's American 
advisor, cabled Lauchlin Currie, one of President Roosevelt's 
administrative assistants:

"After discussing with the Generalissimo the Chinese Ambassador's 
conference with the Secretary of State, I feel you should urgently 
advise the President of the Generalissimo's very strong reaction. I have 
never seen him really agitated before. Loosening of economic pressure or 
unfreezing would dangerously increase Japan's military advantage in 
China. A relaxation of American pressure while Japan has its forces in 
China would dismay the Chinese. Any 'Modus Vivendi' now arrived at with 
Japan would be disastrous to Chinese belief in America and analogous to 
the closing of the Burma Road, which permanently destroyed British 
prestige. Japan and Chinese defeatists would instantly exploit the 
resulting disillusionment and urge oriental solidarity against 
occidental treachery.  It is doubtful whether either past assistance or 
increasing aid could compensate for the feeling of being deserted at 
this hour. The Generalissimo has deep confidence in the President's 
fidelity to his consistent policy but I must warn you that even the 
Generalissimo questions his ability to hold the situation together if 
the Chinese national trust in America is undermined by reports of 
Japan's escaping military defeat by diplomatic victory (ex. 18)."

The same day, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek cabled Mr. T. V. Soong in 
Washington the following message, which the latter promptly delivered to 
Secretary Stimson and Secretary Knox:

"I presume Ambassador Hu Shih has given you a copy of my telegram 
yesterday.  Please convey contents of the message to Secretaries Knox 
and Stimson immediately.

"Please explain to them the gravity of the situation. If America should 
relax the economic blockade and freezing of Japanese assets, or even if 
reports that the United States is considering this should gain currency, 
the morale of our troops will be sorely shaken. During the past two 
months the Japanese propaganda have spread the belief that in November 
an agreement will be successfully reached with the United States. They 
have even come to a silent but nonetheless definite understanding with 
the doubtful elements in our country. If, therefore, there is any 
relaxation of the embargo or freezing regulations, or if a belief of 
that gains ground, then the Chinese people would consider that China has 
been completely sacrificed by the United States. The morale of the 
entire people will collapse and every Asiatic nation will lose faith, 
and indeed suffer such a shock in their faith in democracy that a most 
tragic epoch in the world will be opened.  The Chinese army will 
collapse, and the Japanese will be enabled to carry through their plans, 
so that even if in the future America would come to our rescue the 
situation would be already hopeless. Such a loss would not be to China 
alone.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             Page 377

"We could therefore only request the United States Government to be 
uncompromising, and announce that if the withdrawal of Japanese armies 
from China, is not settled, the question of relaxing of the embargo or 
freezing could not be considered. If, on the other hand, the American 
attitude remains nebulous Japanese propaganda will daily perform its 
fell purpose so that at no cost to them this propaganda will effect the 
break-down of our resistance. Our more than four years of struggle with 
the loss of countless lives and sacrifices and devastation unparalleled 
in history would have been in vain. The certain collapse of our 
resistance will be an unparalleled catastrophe to the world, and I do 
not indeed know how history in future will record this episode (ex. 
18)."

The evening of November 25 (Washington time), Dr. Hu Shih, the Chinese 
Ambassador, called on Secretary Hull and delivered to him a copy of the 
Chinese Foreign Minister's telegram quoted above. According to Secretary 
Hull's memorandum of the conversation, the Ambassador endeavored to 
explain Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's opposition to the *modus 
vivendi* on the ground that the Generalissimo was not thoroughly 
acquainted with the over-all international aspects of the Japanese 
situation, and viewed it only from his own situation in Chungking (ex. 
18). The Secretary's memorandum continued: 

"I replied that in the first place the official heads of our Army and 
Navy for some weeks have been most earnestly urging that we not get into 
war with Japan until they have had an opportunity to increase further 
their plans and methods and means of defense in the Pacific area. In the 
second place, at the request of the more peaceful elements in Japan for 
conversations with this Government looking toward a broad peaceful 
settlement for the entire Pacific area, we have been carrying on 
conversations and making some progress thus far, and the Japanese are 
urging the continuance of these general conversations for the purpose of 
a broad Pacific area settlement. The situation, therefore, is that the 
proposed *modus vivendi* is really a part and parcel of the efforts to 
carry forward these general conversations for the reasons that have been 
fully stated from time to time, and recently to the Chinese Ambassador 
and to others. 

"I said that very recently the Generalissimo and Madame Chiang Kai-shek 
almost flooded Washington with strong and lengthy cables telling us how 
extremely dangerous the Japanese threat is to attack the Burma Road 
through Indochina and appealing loudly for aid, whereas practically the 
first thing this present proposal of mine and the President does is to 
require the Japanese troops to be taken out of Indochina and thereby to 
protect the Burma Road from what Chiang Kai-shek said was an imminent 
danger. Now, I added, Chiang Kai-shek ignores that situation which we 
have taken care of for him and inveighs loudly about another matter 
relating to the release of certain commodities to Japan corresponding to 
the progress made with our conversations concerning a general peace 
agreement. He also overlooks the fact that our proposal would relieve 
the menace of Japan in Indochina to the whole South Pacific area, 
including Singapore the Netherlands East Indies, Australia, and also the 
United States, with the Philippines and the rubber and tin trade routes. 
All of this relief from menace to each of the countries would continue 
for ninety days. One of our leading admirals stated to me recently that 
the limited amount of more or less inferior oil products that we might 
let Japan have during that period would not to any appreciable extent 
increase Japanese war and naval preparations. I said that, of course, we 
can cancel this proposal but it must be with the understanding that we 
are not to be charged with failure to send our fleet into the area near 
Indochina and into Japanese waters, if by any chance Japan makes a 
military drive southward.

"The Ambassador was very insistent in the view that he would send back 
to his Government a fuller explanation which he hoped might relieve the 
situation more or less. Our conversation was, of course, in a friendly 
spirit (ex. 18)."

The same evening, whether before or after his talk with Secretary Hull 
is not clear from the record before the Committee, Dr. Hu Shih called on 
Dr. Stanley E. Hornbeck, political advisor to the Secretary. After 
expressing to Dr. Hornbeck his complete confidence that the United 
States "would yield nothing in the field of principles and pursue no 
course of 'appeasement' ", the Chinese Ambassador repeated what

Page 378             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

he had said at the conference the preceding day regarding the second and 
third points of the *modus vivendi*, evidencing the concern of his 
Government that point 2 would leave Japan free to continue operations 
against China and that point 3 would not sufficiently limit the number 
of Japanese troops in Indo-China to dispel the Japanese threat to the 
Burma Road. He expressed the hope that the *modus vivendi* would be made 
more restrictive (ex. 18).

In the meantime, other intercepted Japanese messages available to 
Secretary Hull before delivery of the United States reply on November 26 
(Washington time), in addition to the messages (ex. 1, pp. 155, 160) in 
which the Japanese Foreign Minister told Ambassador Nomura that a return 
to the status prior to the freezing orders was not enough and that it 
would be necessary to have a solution that would "come up to the B 
proposal," had indicated that the Japanese Government would accept 
nothing less than the terms of that proposal. Thus, on November 24 
(Japan time), the Japanese Foreign Minister cabled Ambassador Nomura:

"Our expectations, as I told you in my #798, go beyond the restoration 
of Japan-American trade and a return to the situation of the freezing 
legislation and require the realization of all points of Proposal B with 
the exception of clauses 6 and 7. (*Note*. Clauses 6 and 7 were not 
included in the Japanese proposal of November 20.) Therefore, our demand 
for a cessation of aid to Chiang (the acquisition of Netherlands Indies 
goods and at the same time the supply of American petroleum to Japan as 
well) is a most essential condition (ex. 1, p. 172)."

Again on November 26 (Japan time) Foreign Minister Togo cabled 
Ambassador Nomura that "our final proposal envisages an agreement on the 
basis of the 'B' proposal in toto" with the two exceptions already noted 
(ex. 1, p. 176). The same day the Foreign Minister cabled Ambassador 
Nomura that as soon as he reached a settlement on the basis of the 
November 20 note-

"it is essential that you secure guarantees for the acquisition of goods 
in connection with clauses 2 and 3 (*Note*: clauses 3 and 4 of the 
November 20 note) of that proposal. Of these goods the acquisition of 
petroleum is one of the most pressing and urgent requirements of the 
Empire. Therefore, * * * prior to the signing of an understanding, and 
at as early a date as possible, I would like to have you make our wishes 
known insofar as petroleum imports are concerned along the following 
lines:

"4,000,000 tons per year from the United States (ex. 1, p. 177)."

On November 21 (Washington time) Ambassador Kurusu had called on 
Secretary Hull and handed him a letter which he proposed to sign as a 
clarification of Japan's interpretation of the Tripartite Pact. The 
proposed letter asserted that the Pact did not in any way infringe the 
sovereign rights of Japan as an independent state; that Japan was free 
to make its own interpretation; that the Japanese Government would not 
become involved in war "at the behest of any foreign power"; and that it 
would " accept warfare only as the ultimate, inescapable necessity for 
the maintenance of its security and the preservation of its national 
life against active injustice" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 757). The record of 
the conversations shows that the substance of all of these assertions 
had been made by the Japanese many times before. Secretary Hull asked 
the Ambassador whether he had anything more to offer on the whole 
subject of a peaceful settlement, and Mr. Kurusu replied that he did not 
(ex. 29, vol. II, p. 756). Secretary Hull described this incident in his 
testimony:

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            Page 379

"The next morning, Kurusu came to my apartment in the hotel and was 
talking about the Tripartite Agreement, endeavoring to minimize that, 
and I suddenly inquired of him if his government had anything more to 
offer on the general peace situation, and he quickly said, 'No.'

"So there we had nailed down what he said was the last proposal and what 
their interceptions had informed us was very final in the matter (tr. 
1181)."

Secretary Hull had also received a report from Ambassador Grew of his 
talk with Foreign Minister Togo on November 24 (Japan time), during 
which the Foreign Minister stated that the withdrawal of the Japanese 
troops from southern to northern Indochina was the maximum concession 
Japan could make "in any event", and that Japan would be willing to have 
President Roosevelt act as "introducer" between Japan and China "with 
the understanding that then the United States would refrain from action 
prejudicial to restoring peace between China and Japan," I. E., cease 
all aid to China (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 762-763).

On Wednesday, November 26 (Washington time), Secretary Stimson talked 
with Secretary Hull at 9:15 a. M. And again at 9:50 a. m., according to 
the White House telephone records (tr. 5546). Mr. Stimson summarized the 
conversations in his notes:

"Hull told me over the telephone this morning that he had about made up 
his mind not to give (make) the proposition that Knox and I passed on 
the other day to the Japanese but to kick the whole thing over-to tell 
them that he has no other proposition at all. The Chinese have objected 
to that proposition-when he showed it to them; that is, to the 
proposition which he showed to Knox and me, because it involves giving 
to the Japanese the small modicum of oil for civilian use during the 
interval of the truce of the three months. Chiang Kai-shek had sent a 
special message to the effect that that would make a terrifically bad 
impression in China; that it would destroy all their courage and that 
they (it) would play into the hands of his, Chiang's, enemies and that 
the Japanese would use it. T. V. Soong had sent me this letter and has 
asked to see me and I had called Hull up this morning to tell him so and 
ask him what he wanted me to do about it. He replied as I have just said 
above-that he had about made up his mind to give up the whole thing in 
respect to a truce and to simply tell the Japanese that he had no 
further action to propose (tr. 14,420)."

On his return to the State Department from the War Council meeting the 
preceding day, Secretary Hull had been told by Secretary Stimson that 
the Japanese were embarking a large expeditionary force of 30, 40, or 50 
ships at Shanghai and that this expedition was proceeding along the 
China coast south of Formosa. Secretary Stimson had also telephoned 
President Roosevelt about this, and had sent copies of the intelligence 
report to him. A few minutes after his telephone conversations with 
Secretary Hull on the morning of November 26, Secretary Stimson 
telephoned the President to inquire whether he had received the report 
on the Japanese expedition. According to Secretary Stimson's notes, the 
President-

"fairly blew up-jumped up into the air, so to speak, and said he hadn't 
seen it and that that changed the whole situation because it was an 
evidence of bad faith on the part of the Japanese that while they were 
negotiating for an entire truce-an entire withdrawal (from China)-they 
should be sending this expedition down there to Indo-china, I told him 
that it was a fact that had come to me through G-2 and through the Navy 
Secret Service and I at once got another copy of the paper I had sent 
last night and sent it over to him by special messenger (tr. 14,420-
14,421)."

The record before the Committee contains the following "Memorandum for 
the President," dated November 26 (Washington time) and signed by 
Secretary Stimson:

380   PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

JAPANESE CONVOY MOVEMENT TOWARDS INDO-CHINA

"About a month and a half ago we learned through Magic that the Japanese 
Government informed the Vichy Government that they proposed to move 
approximately 50,000 troops into Indo-China in addition to the 40,000 
already there by previous agreement.

"Today information has accumulated to the effect that a convoy of from 
ten to thirty ships, some of 10,000 tons displacement, has been 
assembled near the mouth of the Yangtse River below Shanghai. This could 
mean a force as great as 50,000 but more probably a smaller number. 
Included in this ship concentration was at least one landing-boat 
carrier. The deck-load of one vessel contained heavy bridge equipment. 
Later reports indicate that this movement is already under way and ships 
leave been seen south of Formosa.
 
"The officers concerned in the Military Intelligence Division feel that 
unless we receive other information, this is more or less a normal 
movement, that is, a logical follow-up of their previous notification to 
the Vichy Government.

"I will keep you informed of any other information in this particular 
field (ex. 98)."

At 6:54 p. M. That day the following priority message was dispatched 
from the Navy Department: 

"From the President. For the High Commissioner Philippines

"Admiral Hart will deliver to you a copy of a despatch which with my 
approval the CNO and the COS addressed to the senior Army and Navy 
commanders in the Philippines. In addition you are advised that the 
Japanese are strongly reinforcing their garrisons and naval forces on 
the Mandates in a manner which indicates they are preparing this region 
as quickly as possible against a possible attack on them by US Forces. 
However, I am more particularly concerned over increasing opposition of 
Japanese leaders and by current southward troop movements from Shanghai 
and Japan to the Formosa area. Preparations are becoming apparent in 
China, Formosa, and Indo China for an early aggressive movement of some 
character although as yet there are no clear indications as to its 
strength or whether it will be directed against the Burma Road, 
Thailand, Malay Peninsula, Netherlands East Indies, or the Philippines. 
Advance against Thailand seems the most probable. I consider it possible 
that this next Japanese aggression might cause an outbreak of 
hostilities between the U. S. and Japan. I desire that after further 
informing yourself as to the situation and the general outlines of naval 
and military plans through consultation with Admiral Hart and General 
MacArthur you shall in great confidence present my views to the 
President of the Philippine Commonwealth and inform him that as always I 
am relying upon the full cooperation of his Government and his people. 
Please impress upon him the desirability of avoiding public 
pronouncement or action since that might make the situation more 
difficult. Roosevelt (tr. 13,861-13,862)."

The evidence before the Committee shows that at about 1:20 p. m. that 
day, November 26, Secretary Hull telephoned n Stark (tr. 1166, 5546), 
that Admiral Stark called Secretary Hull at 2:35 p. m. after attempting 
to telephone General Marshall (who was out of town) at 1:28 (tr. 5546), 
and that late that afternoon Secretary Hull conferred at the White House 
with President Roosevelt (tr. 1147). The Secretary was preceded at the 
White House by the Chinese Ambassador, Dr. Hu Shih, and Mr. T. V. Soong 
(ex. 179). Secretary Hull testified that on November 26 he recommended 
to President Roosevelt-and that the President approved-the Secretary's 
calling in the two Japanese Ambassadors and handing them the proposals 
contained in the second section of the counterproposal that had been 
under consideration at the State Department, while withholding the modus 
vivendi plan (tr. 1147). President Roosevelt was, Secretary Hull 
testified, "thoroughly familiar" with both sections of the 
counterproposal (tr. 14, 312). The record before the Committee contains 
the following memorandum dated November 26 (Washington time) from 
Secretary Hull for President Roosevelt: 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             381

"MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

"With reference to our two proposals prepared for submission to the 
Japanese Government, namely:

"(1) A proposal in the way of a draft agreement for a broad, basic, 
peaceful settlement for the Pacific area, which is henceforth to be made 
a part of the general conversations now going on and to be carried on, 
if agreeable to both Governments, with a view to a general agreement on 
this subject.
 
"(2) The second proposal is really closely connected with the 
conversations looking toward a general agreement, which is in the nature 
of a modus vivendi intended to make more feasible the continuance of the 
conversations.
 
"In view of the opposition of the Chinese Government and either the 
half-hearted support or the actual opposition of the British, the 
Netherlands, and the Australian Governments, and in view of the wide 
publicity of the opposition and of the additional opposition that will 
naturally follow through utter lack of an understanding of the vast 
importance and value otherwise of the modus vivendi, without in any way 
departing from my views about the wisdom and the benefit of this step to 
all of the countries opposed to the aggressor nations who are interested 
in the Pacific area, I desire very earnestly to recommend that at this 
time I call in the Japanese Ambassadors and hand to them a copy of the 
comprehensive basic proposal for a general peaceful settlement, and at 
the same time withhold the modus vivendi proposal. 

"/S/ CORDELL HULL (ex. 18)."

In his testimony before the Committee, Secretary Hull gave a more 
detailed statement of the considerations which led to his recommendation 
to the President: 

"I and other high officers of our Government knew that the Japanese 
military were poised for attack. We knew that the Japanese were 
demanding-and had set a time limit, first of November 25 and extended 
later to November 29, for-acceptance by our Government of their extreme 
last-word proposal of November 20.
 
"It was therefore my judgment, as it was that of the President and other 
high officers, that the chance of the Japanese accepting our proposal 
was remote.

"So far as the modus vivendi aspect would have appeared to the Japanese, 
it contained only a little chicken feed in the shape of some cotton, 
oil, and a few other commodities in very limited quantities as compared 
with the unlimited quantities the Japanese were demanding.

"It was manifest that there would be widespread opposition from American 
opinion to the modus vivendi aspect of the proposal especially to the 
supplying to Japan of even limited quantities of oil. The Chinese 
Government violently opposed the idea. The other interested governments 
were sympathetic to the Chinese view and fundamentally were unfavorable 
or lukewarm. Their cooperation was a part of the plan. It developed that 
the conclusion with Japan of such an arrangement would have been a major 
blow to Chinese morale. In view of these considerations it became clear 
that the slight prospects of Japan's agreeing to the modus vivendi did 
not warrant assuming the risks involved in proceeding with it, 
especially the serious risk of collapse of Chinese morale and resistance 
and even of disintegration of China. It therefore became perfectly 
evident that the modus vivendi aspect would not be feasible. 

"The Japanese were spreading propaganda to the effect that they were 
being encircled. On the one hand we were faced by this charge and on the 
other by one that we were preparing to pursue a policy of appeasing 
Japan. In view of the resulting confusion, it seemed important to 
restate the fundamentals. We could offer Japan once more what we offered 
all countries, a suggested program of collaboration along peaceful and 
mutually beneficial and progressive lines. It had always been open to 
Japan to accept that kind of a program and to move in that direction. It 
still was possible for Japan to do so. That was a matter for Japan's 
decision. Our hope that Japan would so decide had been virtually 
extinguished. Yet it was felt desirable to put forth this further basic 
effort in the form of one sample of a broad but simple settlement to be 
worked out in our future conversations, on the principle that no effort 
should be spared to test and exhaust every method of peaceful settlement 
(tr. 114S1147). "

Upon his return to the State Department from his conference with 
President Roosevelt, at 5 p. M. Secretary Hull met with Ambassadors 

382         PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Nomura and Kurusu at the Department and handed them, in reply to the 
Japanese note of November 20, the second section of the counterproposal 
which had been under consideration since November 22, together with an 
explanatory statement. The explanatory statement was the first section 
of that counterproposal as quoted herein (pp. 70-71) modified by the 
deletion of the modus vivendi and with further changes made necessary 
thereby. It reviewed briefly the objectives sought in the exploratory 
conversations, and stated that it was believed that some progress had 
been made with respect to the general principles involved. Note was 
taken of the recent statements of the Japanese Ambassadors that it would 
be helpful toward creating an atmosphere favorable to that successful 
outcome of the conversations if a temporary modus vivendi could be 
agreed upon, to be in effect while the conversations looking toward a 
comprehensive and peaceful settlement in the Pacific area were 
continuing. It was stated that the United States Government most 
earnestly desired to afford every opportunity for the continuance of the 
discussions to this end. The statement continued:

"The proposals which were presented by the Japanese Ambassador on 
November 20 contain some features which, in the opinion of this 
Government, conflict with the fundamental principles which form a part 
of the general settlement under consideration and to which each 
Government has declared that it is committed. The Government of the 
United States believes that the adoption of such proposals would not be 
likely to contribute to the ultimate objectives of ensuring peace under 
law, order, and justice in the Pacific area, and it suggests that 
further effort be made to resolve our divergences of views in regard to 
the practical application of the fundamental principles already 
mentioned.

"With this object in view *the Government of the United States offers 
for the consideration of the Japanese Government a plan of a broad but 
simple settlement covering the entire Pacific area as one practical 
exemplification of a program which this Government envisages as 
something to be worked out during our further conversations.*

"The plan therein suggested represents an effort to bridge the gap 
between our draft of June 21, 1941. and the Japanese draft of September 
25, by making a new approach to the essential problems underlying a 
comprehensive Pacific settlement. *This plan contains provisions dealing 
with the practical application of the fundamental principles which we 
have agreed in our conversations constitute the only sound basis for 
worth-while international relations. We hope that in this way progress 
toward reaching a meeting of minds between our two Governments may be 
expedited (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 767)."

The outline of a proposed basis for agreement which Secretary Hull 
handed to the Japanese Ambassadors follows, in full:

"Strictly Confidential, Tentative and Without Commitment.

"WASHINGTON, November 26, 1941.

"OUTLINE OF PROPOSED BASIS FOB AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND 
JAPAN

"SECTION I

"*Draft Mutual Declaration of Policy*

"The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan both 
being solicitous for the peace of the Pacific affirm that their national 
policies are directed toward lasting and extensive peace throughout the 
Pacific area, that they have no territorial designs in that area, that 
they have no intention of threatening other countries or of using 
military force aggressively against any neighboring nation, and that, 
accordingly, in their national policies they will actively support and 
give practical application to the following fundamental principles upon 
which their relations with each other and with all other governments are 
based:

"(1) The principle of inviolability of territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of each and all nations.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            383

"(2) The principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of other 
countries. 

"(3) The principle of equality, including equality of commercial 
opportunity and treatment."

"(4) The principle of reliance upon international cooperation and 
conciliation for the prevention and pacific settlement of controversies 
and for improvement of international conditions by peaceful methods and 
processes.

"The Government of Japan and the Government of the United States have 
agreed that toward eliminating chronic political instability, preventing 
recurrent economic collapse, and providing a basis for peace, they will 
actively support and practically apply the following principles in their 
economic relations with each other and with other nations and peoples:

"(1) The principle of nondiscrimination in international commercial 
relations.

"(2) The principle of international economic cooperation and abolition 
of extreme nationalism as expressed in excessive trade restrictions.

"(3) The principle of nondiscriminatory access by all nations to raw 
material supplies.

"(4) The principle of full protection of the interests of consuming 
countries and populations as regards the operation of international 
commodity agreements.

"(5) The principle of establishment of such institutions and 
arrangements of international finance as may lend aid to the essential 
enterprises and the continuous development of all countries and may 
permit payments through processes of trade consonant with the welfare of 
all countries.

"SECTION II

"Steps to be Taken by the Government of the United States and by the 
Government of Japan

"The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan propose 
to take steps as follows:

"1. The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan will 
endeavor to conclude a multilateral nonaggression pact among the British 
Empire China, Japan, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, Thailand, and 
The united States.

"2. Both Governments will endeavor to conclude among the American, 
British, Chinese, Japanese, the Netherland, and Thai Governments an 
agreement whereunder each of the Governments would pledge itself to 
respect the territorial integrity of French Indochina and, in the event 
that there should develop a threat to the territorial integrity of 
Indochina, to enter into immediate consultation with a view to taking 
such measures as may be deemed necessary and advisable to meet the 
threat in question. Such agreement would provide also that each of the 
Governments party to the agreement would not seek or accept preferential 
treatment in its trade or economic relations with Indochina and would 
use its influence to obtain for each of the signatories equality of 
treatment in trade and commerce with French Indochina.

"3. The Government of Japan will withdraw all military, naval, air, and 
police forces from China and from Indochina.

"4. The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan will 
not support-militarily, politically, economically-any government or 
regime in China other than the National Government of the Republic of 
China with capital temporarily at Chungking.

"5. Both Governments will give up all extraterritorial rights in China, 
including rights and interests in and with regard to international 
settlements and concessions, and rights under the Boxer Protocol of 
1901.

"Both Governments will endeavor to obtain the agreement of the British 
and other governments to give up extraterritorial rights in 
international settlement's and in concessions and under the Boxer 
Protocol of 1901.

"6. The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan will 
enter into negotiations for the conclusion between the United States and 
Japan of a trade agreement, based upon reciprocal most-favored-nation 
treatment and reduction of trade barriers by both countries, including 
an undertaking by the United States to bind raw silk on the free list.

"7. The Government of the United States and the Government of Japan 
will, respectively, remove the freezing restrictions on Japanese funds 
in the United States and on American funds in Japan.

"8. Both Governments will agree upon a plan for the stabilization of the 
dollar-yen rate, with the allocation of funds adequate for this purpose, 
half to be supplied by Japan and half by the United States.

384             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"9. Both Governments will agree that no agreement which either has 
concluded with any third power or powers shall be interpreted by it in 
such a way as to conflict with the fundamental purpose of this 
agreement, the establishment and preservation of peace throughout the 
Pacific area.

"10. Both Governments will use their influence to cause other 
governments to adhere to and to give practical application to the basic 
political and economic principles set forth in this agreement (ex. 167; 
ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 768-770)."

Ambassador Grew was fully informed the same evening of the sub-stance of 
the United States' reply. (Tr. 4513-4522; ex. 75.)

The record before the Committee shows that, commencing with the first 
draft of an American counterproposal on November 22 (Washington time), 
all the officials of the United States Government who were consulted by 
Secretary Hull regarding the proposed modus vivendi necessarily saw and 
considered the successive drafts of the foregoing so-called "Ten Point" 
note, since from the outset the provisions which, as revised, became the 
"Ten Point" note had constituted the second section of the 
counterproposal and had been attached to the first section containing 
the modus vivendi. The record also shows that the provisions of the "Ten 
Point" note probably received more attention from the high officers of 
the Army and Navy than did the terms of the modus vivendi, since the 
part containing the so-called "Ten Points" was based primarily upon the 
State Department's revision of the Morgenthau suggestions of November 
18. It will be recalled that that revision was sent to the Army and Navy 
for comment on November 19, and was the subject of the conference at the 
State Department on November 21 attended by General Gerow and Admiral 
Stark, who thereafter submitted their comments and suggestions to 
Secretary Hull in memoranda of the same date. As has already been 
pointed out, the first section of the "Ten Point" note was based almost 
entirely upon the statement of principles contained in the draft 
proposal submitted by the State Department's Far Eastern Division to 
Secretary Hull on November 11, which in turn had been frequently 
discussed with the Japanese during the six months since the 
conversations began in the spring of 1941.

Returning to Secretary Hull's meeting with Ambassadors Nomura and 
Kurusu, after the Japanese had read the documents handed them by the 
Secretary, Ambassador Kurusu asked whether this was the United States 
reply to their proposal.

"The Secretary replied that we had to treat the proposal as we did, as 
there was so much turmoil and confusion among the public both in the 
United States and in Japan. He reminded the Japanese that in the United 
States we have a political situation-to deal with just as does the 
Japanese Government, and he referred to the fire-eating statements which 
have been recently coming out of Tokyo, which he said had been causing a 
natural reaction among the public in this country. *He said that our 
proposed agreement would render possible practical measures of financial 
cooperation, to which, however, were not referred to in the outline for 
fear that this might give rise to misunderstanding.* He also referred to 
the fact that he had earlier in the conversations acquainted the 
Ambassador of the ambition that had been his *of settling the 
immigration question* but that the situation had so far prevented him 
from realizing that ambition (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 764).

Ambassador Kurusu then commented adversely on various provisions of the 
American note, saying among other things that he did not see how his 
Government could consider paragraphs (3) and (4), and that if this 
represented the idea of the American Government he did not see how any 
agreement was possible. He said that when they reported the United 
States' answer to their Government "it would be

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           385

likely to throw up its hands". He suggested that it might be better if 
they did not refer it to their Government before discussing its contents 
further informally in Washington. Later, he said that he felt the reply 
could be interpreted "as tantamount to meaning the end." He asked 
whether the United States was interested in a modus vivendi. Secretary 
Hull replied that he had explored that and that he had done his best in 
the way of exploration (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 764-766).

In reply to Ambassador Kurusu's suggestion that the document should be 
discussed informally before reporting it to Tokyo-

"The Secretary suggested that they might wish to study the documents 
carefully before discussing them further. He repeated that we were 
trying to do our best to keep the public from becoming uneasy as a 
result of their being harangued. He explained that in the light of all 
that has been said in the press, our proposal was as far as we would go 
at this time in reference to the Japanese proposal; that there was so 
much confusion among the public that it was necessary to bring about 
some clarification; that we have reached a stage when the public has 
lost its perspective and that it was therefore necessary to draw up a 
document which would present a complete picture of our position by 
making provision for each essential point involved.

"The Secretary then referred to the oil question. He said that public 
feeling was so acute on that question that he might almost be lynched if 
he permitted oil to go freely to Japan. He pointed out that if Japan 
should fill Indochina with troops our people would not know what lies 
ahead in the way of a menace to the countries to the south and west. He 
reminded the Japanese that they did not know what tremendous injury they 
were doing to us by keeping immobilized so many forces in countries 
neighboring Indochina. He explained that we are primarily out for our 
permanent futures, and the question of Japanese troops in Indochina 
affects our direct interests (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 765)."

At the conclusion of the meeting, Ambassador Nomura asked whether the 
two Ambassadors could see President Roosevelt, and Secretary Hull 
replied that he had no doubt the President would be glad to see them at 
any time. The Ambassador also said that he would like to have the 
counselor of the Japanese Embassy call on Mr. Joseph W. Ballantine, one 
of the Secretary's principal advisors on Far Eastern affairs, the next 
day "to discuss further details" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 766).

Secretary Hull testified:

"The document handed the Japanese on November 26 was essentially a 
restatement of principles which have long been basic in this country's 
foreign policy. The practical application of those principles to the 
situation in the Far East as embodied in the ten points contained in the 
document, was along lines which had been under discussion with the 
Japanese representatives in the course of the in-formal exploratory 
conversations during the months preceding delivery of the document in 
question. Our Government's proposal embodied mutually profitable 
policies of the kind we were prepared to offer to any friendly country 
and was coupled with the suggestion that the proposal be made the basis 
for further conversations.

*                *                 *                *               *

"Our Government's proposal was offered for the consideration of the 
Japanese Government as one practical example of a program to be worked 
out. It did not rule out other practical examples which either 
Government was free to offer.

We well knew that, in view of Japan's refusal throughout the 
conversations to abandon her policy of conquest and domination, there 
was scant likelihood of her acceptance of this plan. But it is the task 
of statesmanship to leave no possibility for peace unexplored, no matter 
how slight. It was in this spirit that the November 26 document was 
given to the Japanese Government (tr. 1151-1152)."

*Before their meeting with Secretary Hull late in the afternoon of 
November 26 (Washington time)*, the two Japanese Ambassadors had sent a 
joint telegram to Foreign Minister Togo in which they recognized, *even 
before Secretary Hull delivered the " Ten Point" note to them,*

386             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

that the negotiations were for all practical purposes at an end. They 
told the Foreign Minister:

"As we have wired you several times, there is hardly any possibility of 
having them consider our "B" proposal in toto. On the other hand, if we 
let the situation remain tense as it is now, sorry as we are to say so, 
the negotiations will inevitably be ruptured, *if indeed they may not 
already be called so. Our failure and humiliation are complete* (ex. 1, 
p. 180)."

They then asked the approval of the Foreign Minister of the only 
remaining suggestion they had to offer, as a device to obtain more time. 
The Ambassadors suggested, with "grave misgivings," that they be 
permitted to propose to Secretary Hull that President Roosevelt wire 
Foreign Minister Togo (not Emperor Hirohito) that "for the sake of 
posterity he hopes that Japan and the United States will co-operate for 
the maintenance of peace in the Pacific * * * and that you in return 
reply with a cordial message." The Ambassadors asked that their request 
be shown to the Navy Minister (ex. 1. p. 189).

While Ambassador Nomura and Ambassador Kurusu were meeting with 
Secretary Hull at the State Department, and at their direction, the 
counselor of the Japanese Embassy, Mr. Wakasugi, using the trans-Pacific 
telephone, informed the Foreign Office in Tokyo that the meeting was in 
progress and that "the future of the present talks would be decided 
during the course of today's conversation" (ex. 1, p. 179). In making 
this call, Mr. Wakasugi used a telephone code established earlier that 
day in a message from the Foreign Minister which said "the situation is 
momentarily becoming more tense and telegrams take too long" (ex. 1, p. 
178). There is no evidence before the Committee of the use of a trans-
Pacific telephone code in connection with the negotiations prior to the 
establishment of this code by the Japanese Foreign Office before the 
American note was delivered on November 26 (Washington time).

Almost immediately upon his return to the Japanese Embassy, Ambassador 
Kurusu telephoned the Japanese Foreign Office in Tokyo, using the trans-
Pacific telephone. He told the Chief of the American Division, Kumaicho 
Yamamoto:

"I have made all efforts, *but they will not yield*. I sent a cable 
expressing my opinions to the Foreign Minister this morning. [1] The 
situation is just like that. Otherwise there is no means of 
accomplishing it (ex. 1, p. 179)."

He continued-

"I rather imagine you had expected this outcome (ex. 1, p. 180)."

To which Bureau Chief Yamamoto replied:

"Yes, I had expected it, but I wished to exert every effort up to the 
final moment in the hope that something might be accomplished (ex. 1, p. 
180)."

That evening Ambassador Nomura cabled three reports to the Foreign 
Minister of the Ambassadors' meeting with Secretary Hull. The first was 
a brief resume of the "Ten Point" note, accompanied by this comment:

"In view of our negotiations all along, we were both dumbfounded and 
said we could not even cooperate to the extent of reporting this to 
Tokyo. We argued back furiously, but HULL remained solid as a rock. Why 
did the United States have to propose such hard terms as these? Well, 
England, the Netherlands, and China doubtless put her up to it. Then, 
too, we have been urging them to quit helping CHIANG, and lately a 
number of important Japanese in speeches have

[1] The message referred to above in which the Ambassadors said "Our 
failure and humiliation are complete".

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK               387

been urging that we strike at England and the United States. Moreover, 
there have been rumors that we are demanding of Thai that she give us 
complete control over her national defense. All that is reflected in 
these two hard proposals, or we think so (ex. 1, p. 182)."

The third telegram was a detailed account of the meeting (ex. 1, pp. 
183-185). The second telegram consisted of general comments on the 
situation (ex. 1, pp. 182-183). In it Ambassador Nomura showed great 
concern lest some "independent action" taken by Japan *while the 
negotiations were continuing* should place upon Japan the responsibility 
"for the rupture of the negotiations." He pointed out that "up to the 
present we have only been able to press them for an early solution. 
During this time we have not expressed any final intention!" Recognizing 
that "such a thing as the clarification of our intention is a strict 
military secret," the Ambassador recommended:

"consequently, *I think that it might be the better plan, dependent of 
course on the opinions of the Government, that the current negotiations 
be clearly and irrevocably concluded either through an announcement to 
the American Embassy in Tokyo or by a declaration for internal and 
external consumption.* I would like, if such a course is followed, to 
make representations here at the same time (ex. 1, p. 183)."

[**THE TOJO CABINET MAKES A PRETENSE OF CONTINUING THE JAPANESE-AMERICAN CONVERSATIONS AND AT THE SAME TIME MOVES ADDITIONAL JAPANESE TROOPS INTO SOUTHERN INDOCHINA**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 27-December 7, 1941)**

The record before the Committee thus shows that there was little hope or 
expectation in Washington on November 27, either among those in the 
United States Government who were familiar with the Japanese-American 
conversations or on the part of the two Japanese Ambassadors, that the 
Tojo Government in Tokyo would continue the conversations. Nevertheless, 
as requested by Ambassador Kurusu the day before, a meeting with 
President Roosevelt was arranged for 2:30 p. m. on November 27 
(Washington time) at the White House.

That morning, before the White House conference, Secretary Hull held a 
"special and lengthy" press conference at which he reviewed the Far 
Eastern situation and particularly the state of the Japanese-American 
conversations in much greater detail than had been true of the statement 
made to the press late the preceding afternoon, following his conference 
with the two Japanese Ambassadors (tr. 1154-1161). That statement had 
said only that the Japanese Ambassadors had been handed for their 
consideration a document that was the culmination of conferences back 
and forth during recent weeks, and that it was unnecessary to repeat 
what had been said so often in the past that it rested on certain basic 
principles with which the correspondents should be entirely familiar in 
the light of many repetitions (ex. 167). At Secretary Hull's press 
conference on the morning of November 27, he emphasized that from the 
beginning he had kept in mind that the groups in Japan led by the 
military leaders had a plan to conquer by force half of the earth with 
half its population; that this movement had started in earnest in 1937, 
and carried with it a policy of non-observance of any standards of 
conduct in international relations or of any law or of any rule of 
justice or fair play. The Secretary said that from the beginning, as the 
world was going more and more to a state of international anarchy, the 
United States had sought to keep

388             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

alive the basic philosophy and principles governing the opposing 
viewpoint in international relations, but that it was no easy under-
taking. He then briefly reviewed the nature of the conversations he had 
had with the Japanese, commencing in the spring of 1941, to determine 
whether a peaceful settlement relating to the entire Pacific area might 
not be possible. He said that while the conversations during the 
preceding several months had been purely exploratory, for the past 10 
days or so all phases of the basic questions presented and of 
suggestions or ideas or methods of bringing Japan and the United States 
as close together as possible had been explored, on the theory there 
might thus be reached the beginning of some peaceful and cordial 
relations between Japan and other nations in the Pacific area, including 
the United States. He said that during the conversations it had been 
necessary to keep in mind not only the political situation in Japan but 
also the activities of the Japanese Army and Navy, and he cited the 
fact:

"that we had known for some days * * * that the Japanese were pouring 
men and materials and boats and all kinds of equipment into Indo-China. 
* * * There was a further report that the Japanese Navy might make 
attacks some-where there around Siam, any time within a few days (tr. 
1156-1157)."

He said that if the Japanese established themselves in Indochina in 
adequate numbers, which they seemed to be doing, they would have a base 
not only for operations against China but the whole South Sea area. The 
Secretary said that the United States Government had exhausted all its 
efforts to work out phases of this matter with the Japanese; and that 
those efforts had been put forth to facilitate the making of a general 
agreement. On November 26, he continued, because he had found there was 
so much confusion and so many collateral manners brought in, while at 
the same time high Japanese officials in Tokyo continued to proclaim 
their old doctrine of force he had thought it important to bring the 
situation to a clear perspective by restating the fundamental principles 
to which the United States was committed and at the same time show how 
those principles could be applied to a number of specific conditions 
which would logically be a part of a broad basic settlement in the 
entire Pacific area. When he was asked whether he expected the Japanese 
to come back and talk further on the basis of what he had given them on 
November 26, Secretary Hull replied that he did not know, but that the 
Japanese might not do that. In reply to a question whether it could be 
assumed there was not much hope that the Japanese would accept the 
principles to which he had referred and go far enough to afford a basis 
for continuing the conversations, the Secretary said there was always a 
possibility but that he would not say how much probability there might 
be.

Secretary Hull's press conference took place at about 10 o'clock that 
morning. Both before and after it, at 9:17 and 11 o'clock, the Secretary 
talked with Secretary Stimson regarding the state of the negotiations; 
he also talked with Admiral Stark that morning (tr. 1167, 5547). 
Secretary Stimson's notes for that day (November 27) describe his two 
conversations with Secretary Hull:

"A very tense, long day. News is coming in of a concentration and 
movement south by the Japanese of a large Expeditionary Force moving 
south from Shanghai and evidently headed towards Indo-China with a 
possibility of going to the Philippines or to Burma, or to the Burma 
Road or to the Dutch East Indies, but prob-

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         389

ably a concentration to move over into Thailand and to hold a position 
from which they can attack Singapore when the moment arrives.
The first thing in the morning I call up Hull to find out what his 
finale has been with the Japanese-whether he had handed them the new 
proposal which we passed on two or three days ago or whether, as he 
suggested yesterday he would, he broke the whole matter off. He told me 
now that he had broken the whole matter off. As he put it, "I have 
washed my hands of it and it is now in the hands of you and Knox-the 
Army and the Navy." I then called up the President. The President gave 
me a little different view. He said they had ended up, but they ended up 
with a magnificent statement prepared by Hull. I found out afterwards 
that this was not a reopening of the thing but a statement of our 
constant and regular position.

"General Arnold came in to present the orders for the movement of two of 
our biggest planes out from San Francisco and across the Mandated 
Islands to Manila. There is a concentration going on by the Japanese in 
the Mandated Islands and these planes can fly high over them, beyond the 
reach of their pursuit planes and take photographs.

"Knox and Admiral Stark came over and conferred with me and General 
Gerow. Marshall is down at the maneuvers today and I feel his absence 
very much. There was a tendency, not unnatural, on the part of Stark and 
Gerow to seek for more time. I said that I was glad to have time but I 
didn't want it at any cost of humility on the part of the United States 
or of reopening the thing which would show a weakness on our part. The 
main question has been over the message that we shall send to MacArthur. 
We have already sent him a quasi alert, or the first signal for an 
alert, and now, on talking with the President this morning over the 
telephone, I suggested and he approved the idea that we should send the 
final alert; namely, that he should be on the qui vive for any attack 
and telling him how the situation was. So Gerow and Stark and I went 
over the proposed message to him from Marshall very carefully; finally 
got it in shape and with the help of a telephone talk I had with Hull, I 
got the exact statement from him of what the situation was (tr. 14,421-
14,423)."

Because of its relationship to events which followed, it is necessary 
here to refer briefly to the background of Secretary Stimson's 
observation in his notes that General Gerow and Admiral Stark desired 
"to seek for more time." It will be recalled that on November 5, in 
connection with Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's appeal for British and 
American aid, General Marshall and Admiral Stark had concluded that-

"war between the United States and Japan should be avoided while 
building up defensive forces in the Far East, until such time as Japan 
attacks or directly threatens territories whose security to the United 
States is of very great importance (ex. 16)."

As has been seen, one of the major considerations in the modus vivendi 
proposal was the desire of the military and naval authorities "for more 
time." However, at the War Council meeting on November 25 attended by 
General Marshall and Admiral Stark, Secretary Hull stated that there was 
"practically no possibility of an agreement being achieved with Japan" 
(ex. 174, Item 13). The next day, at an Army-Navy Joint Board meeting, 
General Marshall and Admiral Stark directed the preparation of a 
memorandum to President Roosevelt regarding what steps should be taken 
if the negotiations with Japan should end without agreement. The meeting 
on November 27 described by Secretary Stimson in his notes for that day 
was also described in a memorandum for General Marshall prepared the 
same day by General Gerow:

"2. Later in the morning I attended a conference with the Secretary of 
War, Secretary of Navy, and Admiral Stark. The various messages to the 
Army and Navy Commanders and to Mr. Sayre were discussed. A joint 
message for General MacArthur and Admiral Hart was approved (copy 
attached). The Secretaries were informed of the proposed memorandum you 
and Admiral Stark
390             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

directed be prepared for the President. The Secretary of War wanted to 
be sure that the memorandum would not be construed as a recommendation 
to the President that he request Japan to reopen the conversations. He 
was reassured on that point. It was agreed that the memorandum would be 
shown to both Secretaries before dispatch. 

"3. Both the message and the memorandum were shown to the Secretary of 
War. He suggested some minor changes in the memorandum. These were made 
(copy attached) (ex. 45)."

In his prepared statement submitted to the Committee, Secretary Stimson 
stated that at the meeting with General Gerow and Admiral Stark, 

"I told them, which was the fact, that I also would be glad to have time 
but I did not want it at the cost of humiliation of the United States or 
of backing down on any of our principles which would show a weakness on 
our part (tr. 14, 394)."

General Marshall summed up his viewpoint and that of Secretary Stimson 
in his testimony before the committee: 

"He (Secretary Stimson) was very much afraid-he feared that we would 
find ourselves involved in the developing situation where our 
disadvantages would be so great that it would be quite fatal to us when 
the Japanese actually broke peace. 

"He also felt very keenly that; and thought about this part a great deal 
more than I did because it was his particular phase of the matter, that 
we must not go so far in delaying actions of a diplomatic nature as to 
sacrifice the honor of the country. He was deeply concerned about that. 

"My approach to the matter, of course, was much more materialistic. I 
was hunting for time. Hunting for time, so that whatever did happen we 
would be better prepared than we were at that time, that particular 
time. 

"So it was a question of resolving his views as to the honor, we will 
say, of the United States, and his views of a diplomatic procedure which 
allowed the Japanese to continue movements until we would be in a 
hopeless situation before the peace was broken and mine, which as I say 
were much more materialistic, as I think they should have been, that we 
should get as much time as we could in order to make good the terrible 
deficiencies in our defensive arrangements (tr. 13,820-13,821)."

The memorandum for President Roosevelt, although dated November 27 
(Washington time), was signed by General Marshall upon his return to 
Washington on November 28 (Washington time), with the minor changes 
suggested by Secretary Stimson, and was as follows: 

"Memorandum for the President 

"Subject: Far Eastern Situation. 

"If the current negotiations end without agreement, Japan may attack: 
the Burma Road; Thailand; Malaya; the Netherlands East Indies; the 
Philippines; the Russian Maritime Provinces.

"There is little probability of an immediate Japanese attack on the 
Maritime Provinces because of the strength of the Russian forces. Recent 
Japanese troop movements all seem to have been southward. 

"The magnitude of the effort required will militate against direct 
attack against Malaya and the Netherlands East Indies until the threat 
exercised by United States forces in Luzon is removed. 

"Attack on the Burma Road or Thailand offers Japanese objectives 
involving less risk of major conflict than the others named, and clearly 
within the means available, if unopposed by major powers. Attack on the 
Burma Road would, however, be difficult and might fail. If successful, 
the Chinese Nationalist Government might collapse. Occupation of 
Thailand gains a limited strategic advantage as a preliminary to 
operations against Malaya or the Netherlands East Indies; might relieve 
internal political pressure, and to a lesser extent, external economic 
pressure. Whether the offensive will be made against the Burma Road, 
Thailand, or the Philippines cannot now be forecast. 

"The most essential thing now, from the United States viewpoint, is to 
gain time. Considerable Navy and Army reinforcements have been rushed to 
the 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         391

Philippines but the desirable strength has not yet been reached. The 
process of reinforcement is being continued. Of great and immediate 
concern is the safety of the Army convoy now near Guam, and the Marine 
Corps' convoy just leaving Shanghai. Ground forces to a total of 21,000 
are due to sail from the United States by December 8, 1941, and it is 
important that this troop reinforcement reach the Philippines before 
hostilities commence. 

"Precipitance of military action on our part should be avoided so long 
as consistent with national policy. The longer the delay, the more 
positive becomes the assurance of retention of these islands as a naval 
and air base. Japanese action to the south of Formosa will be hindered 
and perhaps seriously blocked as long as we hold the Philippine Islands. 
War with Japan certainly will interrupt our transport of supplies to 
Siberia, and probably will interrupt the process of aiding China. 

"After consultation with each other, United States, British, and Dutch 
military authorities in the Far East agreed that joint military 
counteraction against Japan should be undertaken only in case Japan 
attacks or directly threatens the territory or mandated territory of the 
United States, the British Commonwealth, or the Netherlands East Indies, 
or should the Japanese move forces into Thailand west of 100  east or 
south of 10  north, Portuguese Timor, New Caledonia, or the Loyalty 
Islands. 

"Japanese involvement in Yunnan or Thailand up to a certain extent is 
advantageous, since it leads to further dispersion, longer lines of 
communication, and an additional burden on communications. However, a 
Japanese advance to the west of 100  east or south of 10  north, 
immediately becomes a threat to Burma and Singapore. Until it is patent 
that Japan intends to advance beyond these lines, no action which might 
lead to immediate hostilities should be taken. 

"It is recommended that: 

"prior to the completion of the Philippine reinforcement, military 
counteraction be considered only if Japan attacks or directly threatens 
United States, British, or Dutch territory as above outlined; 

"*in case of a Japanese advance into Thailand, Japan be warned by the 
United States, the British and the Dutch governments that advance beyond 
the lines indicated may lead to war; prior to such warning no joint 
military opposition be undertaken;* 

"*steps be taken at once to consummate agreements with the British and 
Dutch for the issuance of such warning.*

"[S] G. C. MARSHALL
"[S] H. R. STARK (ex. 17)."

Before the meeting at the White House at 2 p. M. On November 27 
(Washington time), Secretary Hull conferred briefly alone with President 
Roosevelt (ex. 58). When the two Japanese Ambassadors arrived, 
Ambassador Nomura seized the first opportunity to say that they were 
disappointed over the failure of any agreement for a modus vivendi. 
President Roosevelt expressed his grateful appreciation and that of the 
United States Government to the peace element in Japan which had worked 
hard in support of the movement for a peaceful settlement in the Pacific 
area, and made it clear that the United States was not overlooking what 
that element had done and was still ready to do. He added that most 
people in the United States wanted a peaceful solution of the Pacific 
problems, and that while he had not given up yet, the situation was 
serious and that fact should be recognized. He pointed out that the 
Japanese occupation of French Indo-China had had the effect of a cold 
bath on the people of the United States as well as on the United States 
Government, and intimated that a second such bath appeared to be in the 
offing. He said that throughout the conversations there had been no real 
indication of a desire for peace by any of Japan's leaders, and that 
this also had had its effect on the conversations. According to his 
memorandum of the meeting, Secretary Hull then 

"made it clear that unless the opposition to the peace element in 
control of the Government should make up its mind definitely to act and 
talk and move in a peaceful direction, no conversations could or would 
get anywhere as has been so 

392             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

clearly demonstrated; that everyone knows that the Japanese slogans of 
co-prosperity, new order in East Asia and a controlling influence in 
certain areas are all terms to express in a camouflaged manner the 
policy of force and conquest by Japan and the domination by military 
agencies of the political economic, social, and moral affairs of each of 
the populations conquered; and that so long as they move in that 
direction and continue to increase their cultural relations, military 
and otherwise with Hitler through such instruments as the Anti-Comintern 
Pact and the Tripartite Pact, et cetera, et cetera, there could not be 
any real progress made on a peaceful course (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 772)."

During the conversation, Ambassador Kurusu suggested that the trouble 
was not with fundamentals so much as with their application. However, 
with reference to a recent remark of President Roosevelt about 
"introducing" Japan and China, when the Ambassador asked who would take 
such action and the President said "both sides"-meaning Japan as well as 
China-the Ambassador pointed out "that from a practical standpoint that 
would be very difficult to accomplish" (ex. 29, Vol. II, pp. 770-772). 

According to Ambassador Nomura's report to Tokyo, as the meeting ended, 
President Roosevelt told the Ambassadors that he was leaving the next 
day, Friday, for Warm Springs, Ga., for a rest and was planning to 
return the following Wednesday. He said that he would like to talk with 
the Ambassadors then and would be very gratified if some means of 
settlement could be discovered in the meantime (ex. 1, pp. 192-194). In 
addition to Ambassador Nomura's cabled report of the meeting, Ambassador 
Kurusu telephoned the Japanese Foreign Office in Tokyo, using the voice 
code previously arranged, and said that in the conversation with the 
President "there wasn't much that was different from Hull's talks of 
yesterday." He asked how things were in Tokyo, and was told that a 
crisis appeared "imminent." The Ambassador reported that the United 
States wanted to continue the negotiations, but Bureau Chief Yamamoto 
said "we can't yield." The Ambassador concluded by saying that there was 
nothing of particular interest in the day's talk with President 
Roosevelt, except that the southward advance of Japanese troops was 
"having considerable effect" (ex. 1, pp. 188-191). 

The record shows that President Roosevelt had an appointment with 
Admiral Ernest J. King at 3:45 p. m. immediately after his conference 
with the two Japanese Ambassadors (ex. 58), and that at about 4:00 p. m. 
Secretary Stimson telephoned and talked with Secretary Hull (tr. 1167, 
5547). At 5:00 p. m. Secretary Hull telephoned Admiral Stark, but was 
unable to reach him and talked with Admiral Schuirmann instead (tr. 
5547). 

In addition to the conversations Secretary Hull had with officials of 
the United States Government on November 27 (Washington time), the 
Secretary and Under Secretary Welles also conferred that day with 
representatives of three of the governments that had been consulted in 
connection with the proposed modus vivendi. The Netherlands Minister 
called and handed Secretary Hull a memorandum of the same date in which 
the Netherlands Foreign Minister took the position that inasmuch as the 
modus vivendi proposal was only the beginning of negotiations, the 
military and economic concessions suggested therein as a start seemed to 
be "quite far reaching" and that it was "most unlikely" that Japan would 
at the present moment leave the Axis (ex. 18). The Australian Minister, 
Mr. Casey, also called on Secretary Hull and asked whether the 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         393

modus vivendi had been abandoned permanently. When Secretary Hull said 
he so considered it, Mr. Casey 

"expressed great concern and desired to know more about the movements of 
Chiang Kai-shek and others intended to discourage the further 
consideration of the modus vivendi. I referred to copies of British 
communications on the subject, adding that Ambassador Halifax was strong 
for the proposal all the way and that I sympathized with his situation 
but I did not feel that the communications from Churchill and Eden, with 
qualifications such as were in them, would be very helpful in a bitter 
fight that would be projected by Chiang Kai-shek and carried forward by 
all of the malcontents in the United States, although I felt 
unreservedly that Churchill and Eden, like the British Ambassador here, 
would be for whatever we might do, even though not entirely to their 
liking in every way. The Minister inquired whether I thought it would be 
feasible to take up this matter further with the Chinese, and I replied 
that I did not think so, so far as I am concerned. I thanked the 
Minister for his cooperation and that of his Government (ex. 18)."

Also that morning the British Ambassador "urgently" called on Under 
Secretary Welles. The Under Secretary's memorandum of their conversation 
noted that Lord Halifax said that Secretary Hull had telephoned him the 
previous evening and told him the nature of the United States' reply to 
Japan, and continued: 

"The Ambassador said that he was not quite clear in his own mind as to 
the reasons which prompted this sudden change in presenting the Japanese 
Government with a document other than the modus vivendi document which 
had so recently been under discussion. 

"I said that Secretary Hull had requested me to say to the Ambassador in 
this regard that one of the reasons for the determination reached was 
the half-hearted support given by the British Government to the earlier 
proposal which had been under discussion and the raising of repeated 
questions by the British Government in regard thereto. 

"Lord Halifax said he could not understand this inasmuch as he had 
communicated to Secretary Hull the full support of the British 
Government. 

"To that I replied that the message sent by Mr. Churchill to the 
President yesterday could hardly be regarded as "full support," but on 
the contrary, very grave questioning of the course then proposed. 

"Lord Halifax said that this message had been intended merely to express 
the objections on the part of the Chinese Government. He went on to say 
that he himself had been surprised by the vigor of the Chinese 
objections and that he had, in fact, stated to the Chinese Ambassador 
that in view of the fact that only ten days ago General Chiang Kai-shek 
was imploring the British and the United States Government to prevent 
the closing of the Burma Road, it would seem to him, Lord Halifax, that 
the course proposed by Secretary Hull gave positive assurances to the 
Chinese Government that the Burma Road would in fact be kept open if the 
modus vivendi agreement with Japan could be consummated. He said that he 
felt that the attitude taken by the Chinese Government was based partly 
on faulty information and partly on the almost hysterical reaction 
because of the fear that any kind of an agreement reached between Japan 
and the United States at this time would result in a complete breakdown 
of Chinese morale.

"I told Lord Halifax that information received this morning tended to 
show that Japanese troop movements in southern Indochina were already 
very active and that Japanese forces there were being quickly increased 
in number. I said these reports likewise indicated that the threat 
against Thailand was imminent. I said, in conclusion, that it was 
evident from the information received here that the Japanese were 
preparing to move immediately on a very large scale. The gravity of the 
situation, I thought, could not be exaggerated (ex. 18)."

While on November 27 (Washington time) both Secretary Hull and Under 
Secretary Welles thus believed the situation could not be more serious, 
the record before the Committee indicates that the political adviser to 
the Secretary, Dr. Stanley K. Hornbeck, was less concerned. In a 
memorandum of that date entitled "Problem of Far Eastern relations-
Estimate of Situation and certain probabilities," Dr. 

394           PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Hornbeck expressed the opinion that he did not believe the United States 
was "on the immediate verge of 'war' in the Pacific." He stated that in 
his opinion there was less reason on November 27 than there was a week 
before for the United States to be apprehensive lest Japan make war on 
the United States. "Were it a matter of placing bets," he wrote, "the 
undersigned would give odds of five to one that the United States and 
Japan will *not* be at 'war' on or before Decem-15 [sic]." (Tr. 5523-
5537). [Italics in original.] 

Apart from the remark of Bureau Chief Yamamoto during his telephone 
conversation with Ambassador Kurusu the evening of November 26 
(Washington time), when Yamamoto told the Ambassador that he had 
expected that the United States would not yield to the demands made by 
the Japanese Government in its note of November 20, and Yamamoto's 
remark the next day in his telephone conversation with the Ambassador 
that Japan "can't yield," there is no evidence before the Committee that 
the Japanese Foreign Office furnished the two Japanese Ambassadors any 
official comment or instructions as to their next step until November 28 
(Japan time). That day Foreign Minister Togo cabled the following 
instructions: 

"Well, you two Ambassadors have exerted superhuman efforts but, in spite 
of this, the United States has gone ahead and presented this humiliating 
proposal. This was quite unexpected and extremely regrettable. *The 
Imperial Government can by no means use it as a basis for negotiations.* 
Therefore, with a report of the views of the Imperial Government on this 
American proposal which l will send you in two or three days, the 
negotiations *will be de facto ruptured. This is inevitable. However, I 
do not wish you to give the impression that the negotiations are broken 
off.* Merely say to them that you awaiting instructions and that, 
although the opinions of your Government are not yet clear to you, to 
your own way of thinking the Imperial Government has always made just 
claims and has borne great sacrifices for the sake of peace in the 
Pacific. Say that we have always demonstrated a long-suffering and 
conciliatory attitude, but that, on the other hand, the United States 
has been unbending, making it impossible for Japan to establish 
negotiations. Since things have come to this pass, I contacted the man 
you told me to in your #1180 and he said that under the present 
circumstances what you suggest is entirely unsuitable. [1] From now on 
do the best you can (ex. 1, p. 195)."

This message, in the above form, was available in Washington on November 
28 (Washington time) (ex. 1, p. 195), whether before or after the War 
Council meeting that day is not known definitely, although, as noted 
below, there is some indication that it was not available until 
afterward. 

The War Council met at noon at the White House, with President 
Roosevelt, Secretary of State Hull, Secretary of War Stimson, Secretary 
of the Navy Knox, and General Marshall and Admiral Stark present. 
Secretary Hull repeated the comments he had made 3 days before, at the 
War Council meeting on November 25, emphasizing again that there was 
"practically no possibility of an agreement being achieved with Japan," 
that the Japanese were likely "to break out at any time with new acts of 
conquest," employing the element of surprise as "a central point in 
their strategy," and that the "safeguarding of our national security was 
in the hands of the Army and the Navy" (Tr. 1203). Earlier that day 
Secretary Stimson had received from the Military Intelligence Division 
(G-2) a summary of the available information regarding Japanese military 
and naval move-

[1] This has reference to the suggestion made by the two Ambassadors on 
November 26 (Washington time) that they be permitted to propose to 
Secretary Hull that President Roosevelt send a personal message to 
Foreign Minister Togo (ex. 1, p. 180). 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            395

ments in the Far East, and had taken it to President Roosevelt and 
suggested that he read it before the War Council meeting, which the 
President had called. In his notes of the meeting, Secretary Stimson 
said: 

"When we got back there at 12:00 o'clock he had read the paper that I 
had left with him. The main point of the paper was a study of what the 
Expeditionary Force, which we know has left Shanghai and is headed 
South, is going to do. G-2 pointed out that it might develop into an 
attack on the Philippines or a landing of further troops in Indo-China, 
or an attack on Thailand or an attack on the Dutch Netherlands, or on 
Singapore. After the President had read these aloud, he pointed out that 
there was one more. It might, by attacking the Kra Isthmus, develop into 
an attack on Rangoon, which lies only a short distance beyond the Kra 
Isthmus and the taking of which by the Japanese would effectually stop 
the Burma Road at its beginning. This, I think, was a very good 
suggestion on his part and a very likely one. It was the consensus that 
the present move-that there was an Expeditionary Force on the sea of 
about 25,000 Japanese troops aimed for a landing somewhere-completely 
changing the situation when we last discussed whether or not we could 
address an ultimatum to Japan about moving the troops which she already 
had on land in Indo-China. It was now the opinion of everyone that if 
this expedition was allowed to get around the southern point of Indo-
China and to go off and land in the Gulf of Siam, either at Bangkok or 
further west, it would be a terrific blow at all of the three Powers, 
Britain at Singapore, the Netherlands, and ourselves in the Philippines. 
It was the consensus of everybody that this must not be allowed. Then we 
discussed how to prevent it. It was agreed that if the Japanese got into 
the Isthmus of Kra, the British would fight. It was also agreed that if 
the British fought, we would have to fight. And it now seems clear that 
if this expedition was allowed to round the southern point of Indo-
China, this whole chain of disastrous events would be set on foot of 
going.

"It further became a consensus of views that rather than strike at the 
Force as it went by without any warning on the one hand, which we didn't 
think we could do; or sitting still and allowing it to go on, on the 
other, which we didn't think we could do; that the only thing for us to 
do was to address it a warning that if it reached a certain place, or a 
certain line, or a certain point, we should have to fight. The 
President's mind evidently was running towards a special telegram from 
himself to the Emperor of Japan. This he had done with good results at 
the time of the Panay incident, but for many reasons this did not seem 
to me to be the right thing now and I pointed them out to the President. 
In the first place, a letter to the Emperor of Japan could not be 
couched in terms which contained an explicit warning. One does not warn 
an Emperor. In the second place it would not indicate to the people of 
the United States what the real nature of the danger was. Consequently I 
said there ought to be a message by the President to the people of the 
United States and I thought that the best form of a message would be an 
address to Congress reporting the danger, reporting what we would have 
to do if the danger happened. The President accepted this ides of a 
message but he first thought of incorporating in it the terms of his 
letter to the Emperor. But again I pointed out that he could not 
publicize a letter to an Emperor in such a way; that he had better send 
his letter to the Emperor separate as one thing and a secret thing, and 
then make his speech to the Congress as a separate and a more 
understandable thing to the people of the United States. This was the 
final decision at that time and the President asked Hull and Knox and 
myself to try to draft such papers (tr. 14,424-14,426)."

Shortly after the meeting ended, President Roosevelt left for Warm 
Springs, Ga., telling reporters that the Japanese situation might 
require his return at any time. [1]

Also on November 28, the Netherlands Minister called on Secretary Hull 
to inquire what reactions the Secretary had had from the Japanese 
situation. The Secretary recorded that he handed the Minister- 

"three cables from Saigon and other localities in the French Indochina 
area indicating that tens of thousands of Japanese troops with 
equipment, vessels, trans-

[1] Earlier that day he had informed the press that American merchant 
vessels sailing the Pacific would not be armed "under existing 
circumstances." When asked how long he expected the existing 
circumstances to prevail, the President had replied that that question 
"should be asked In Tokyo" (Washington Post, November 29, 1941). 

396             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

ports, et cetera, were proceeding to that area from the north. He 
examined the cables carefully and appeared much disturbed about the 
Japanese troop movements. The Minister stated that this presented a very 
serious situation. 

The Minister wanted to make clear that he had supported me unequivocally 
in connection with the proposed modus vivendi arrangement which I 
abandoned on Tuesday evening. November twenty-fifth. Or practically 
abandoned when the Chinese had exploded without knowing half the true 
facts or waiting to ascertain them. I said that I had determined early 
Wednesday morning, November twenty-sixth, to present to the Japanese 
later ill the day the document containing a proposed draft of an 
agreement which set forth all of the basic principles for which this 
Government stands and has stood for, for many years. Especially 
including the maintenance of the territorial integrity of China. I 
reminded the Minister that the central point in our plan w-as the 
continuance of the conversations with Japan looking toward the working 
out of a general agreement for a complete peaceful settlement in the 
Pacific area and that the so-called modus vivendi was really a part and 
parcel of these conversations and their objectives intended to 
facilitate and keep them alive and that, of course, there was nothing 
that in any way could be construed as a departure from the basic 
principles which were intended to go into the general peace agreement. 
The Minister said he understood the situation (tr. 4475-4476)."

The British Minister, Sir Ronald Campbell, called on Dr. Hornbeck that 
day to inquire whether the Japanese-American negotiations had in fact 
"broken down" as, he said, was stated in a message the British armed 
authorities had received from the United States armed authorities. [2] 
Dr. Hornbeck told the Minister that so far as he was aware neither 
Government had "declared or indicated" that the negotiations were 
terminated, but that he was not in a position to confirm or deny the 
statement referred to by the Minister (ex. 18). At 7 o'clock that 
evening the State Department sent a telegram to Ambassador Gauss in 
Chungking which summarized the Japanese demands of November 20 and the 
terms of the proposed modus vivendi. The telegram briefly reviewed the 
circumstances which led to the decision to withhold the modus vivendi 
from the United States reply of November 26, concerning which Ambassador 
Gauss had been previously informed, describing in some detail for the 
Ambassador's information the position regarding the modus vivendi taken 
by the Chinese Government (ex. 18). 

According to Secretary Stimson, the rest of the week-end after the war 
council meeting on Friday "was largely taken up with preparing a 
suggested draft of a message for the President to deliver to Congress" 
(Tr. 14403). The record before the Committee shows that Friday afternoon 
Admiral Stark called Secretary Hull on the White House telephone at 2:49 
o'clock and talked with one of the officials of the State Department's 
Far Eastern Division, and that at 5:25 o'clock Secretary Stimson called 
Secretary Hull and talked with Dr. Hornbeck (Tr. 5548). The next day, 
Saturday, November 29 (Washington time), Secretary Stimson and Secretary 
Knox sent to Secretary Hull suggested drafts, which they had prepared, 
of the proposed message to Congress decided upon the day before (ex. 
161). In an attached note in his handwriting, Secretary Stimson 
described his suggestions as a "memo which may be helpful as to certain 
portions of the message to the Congress." Secretary Knox also forwarded 
a copy of his suggestions to President Roosevelt en route to Warm 
Springs, with an accompanying letter in which he said that he had had 
the assistance of both Admiral Stark and Admiral Turner in preparing the 
summation of the military situation contained in his draft. He told the 
President: 

[2] The message referred to appears to have been the Navy "war warning" 
dispatch of November 27 (Washington time) to Admiral Hart and Admiral 
Kimmel, which was sent to the United States Naval Observer in London 
with instructions to "inform British" (ex. 37). 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK              397

"The news this morning indicates the Japs are going to deliberately 
stall for two or three days, so unless this picture changes, I am 
extremely hopeful that you will get a two or three day respite down 
there and will come back feeling very fit (ex. 161)."

It seems probable that Secretary Knox's information that the Japs were 
stalling "for two or three days" was based on Foreign Minister Togo's 
message quoted above, in which the Foreign Minister told Ambassador 
Nomura that with a report of his Government's views on the United 
States' reply of November 26 "which I will send you in two or three 
days, the negotiations will be de facto ruptured" (ex. 1, p. 195). While 
this is not conclusive as to whether or not that message was available 
before the War Council meeting on November 28 (Washington time), it does 
indicate that, although the message was translated by the Navy on 
November 28 it was not seen by Secretary Knox until "this morning", i. 
e., November 29 (Washington time). 

The suggestions sent by Secretary Stimson and Secretary Knox to 
Secretary Hull were combined in a single draft (ex. 161-A), which then 
underwent extensive revision and modification. The revised draft was 
ready by noon the same day, Saturday, November 29 (Washington time), 
according to a handwritten note accompanying a copy of it which Dr. 
Hornbeck sent to Secretary Stimson the next day (ex. 161-A). It was 
accompanied by a draft of a proposed message to Emperor Hirohito and by 
the following memorandum for President Roosevelt dated November 29 
(Washington time): 

"MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

"There is attached a draft of a proposed message to Congress to which 
draft the Secretary of the Navy and the Secretary of War made material 
contributions, and the officers of the Department made further 
contributions, which together comprise the draft of proposed message. 

"In order to get this to you today it has not been possible carefully to 
go over this draft a second time. In fact, I myself have not had time to 
read it at all critically, but expect to do so over the week end and 
give you the benefit of any further comment or suggestions. 

"I also enclose a draft by the Far Eastern officials of a possible 
message from you to the Emperor of Japan. My personal view continues as 
on yesterday to be that its sending will be of doubtful efficacy, except 
for the purpose of making a record. It might even cause such 
complications as Col. Stimson and I referred to on yesterday.

"If you should send this message to the Emperor it would be advisable to 
defer your message to Congress until we see whether the message to the 
Emperor effects any improvement in the situation. I think we agree that 
you will not send message to Congress until the last stage of our 
relations, relating to actual hostility, has been reached. 

"I think you will desire to have any message to the Emperor dispatched 
in code to Ambassador Grew for communication by him to the Emperor 
through appropriate channels (ex. 19)."

The draft of a message to Emperor Hirohito was brief. In it, after 
referring to the long period of unbroken peace between the United States 
and Japan, the President was to state that he was addressing the Emperor 
"because of the deep and far-reaching emergency which appears to be in 
formation." He was then to continue: 

"Developments are occurring in the Pacific area which threaten to 
deprive each of our nations and all humanity of the beneficial influence 
of the long peace between our two countries. Those developments contain 
tragic possibilities. 

"The history of both our countries affords brilliant examples in which 
your and my predecessors have, at other times of great crisis, by their 
enlightened decisions 

398                     PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

and acts, arrested trends and directed national policies along new and 
better courses-thereby bringing blessings to the peoples of both 
countries and to the peoples of other lands. 

"Feeling deeply concerned over the present trend of events, I address 
myself to Your Majesty at this moment in the fervent hope that Your 
Majesty may, as I am doing, give thought to ways of dispelling the dark 
clouds which loom over the relations between our two countries and of 
restoring and maintaining the traditional state of amity wherein both 
our people may contribute to lasting peace and security throughout the 
Pacific area (ex. 19)."

The draft of the proposed message to Congress was longer, a document of 
some twenty typewritten pages (ex. 19). It will be remembered that the 
War Council had decided on November 28 that the message was to be a 
message "to the people of the. United States" as well as "an address to 
Congress reporting the danger, reporting what we would have to do if the 
danger happened" (tr. 14426). If the President should send the message 
to Emperor Hirohito, that, the War Council had decided, was to be "one 
thing and a secret thing," as a message to an Emperor could not be 
publicized as a message to Congress could, and the President was to make 
his speech to Congress "as a separate and more understandable thing to 
the people of the United States" (tr. 14426). The proposed message began 
with these words: 

"GENTLEMEN OF THE CONGRESS: I come before you to report to you on 
serious danger which is threatening this country and its interests in 
the Far East. Relations between the United States and the Japanese 
Empire have reached a stage where I consider it incumbent upon me to lay 
before you the essential facts of the situation and their extremely 
serious implications (ex. 19)."

It then briefly reviewed the development of American foreign policy in 
the Far East since 1833, discussing American relations with China, the 
acquisition by the United States of sovereignty over the Philippines 
with its attendant responsibilities, and the relations between the 
United States and Japan since 1908, including a brief discussion of the 
Nine Power Treaty of 1921. It considered the policy of aggression 
followed by the Japanese first in Manchuria commencing in 1931 and then 
in China, during the course of which American lives and property had 
been imperiled and damaged in disregard for American rights under 
existing treaties. 

The proposed message then took up the relationship of Japan to Germany 
and Italy in their scheme of world-wide conquest. It pointed out that in 
flat defiance of its covenants Japan had invaded and sought to overthrow 
the Government of China and that step by step the Japanese armed forces, 
passing through the China Sea in the immediate proximity of the 
Philippine Islands, had invaded and taken possession of French Indo-
China. It continued: 

"Today they are openly threatening an extension of this conquest into 
the territory of Thailand. That step, if taken, would place them where 
they would directly menace, to the North, the Burma Road, China's 
lifeline, and, to the South, the port and Straits of Singapore through 
which gateway runs the commerce of the world, including our own, between 
the Pacific and the Indian Ocean. 

"To the eastward of the Philippines, Japan has extended her threatening 
activities through the Caroline and Marshall Islands where, in violation 
of the mandate under which she received the custody of those islands, 
she has been secretly establishing naval and air bases and 
fortifications directly on the line between the United States and the 
Philippines. 

"By these steps Japan has enveloped with threatening forces the western, 
northern, and eastern approaches to the Philippines. Should this process 
go further, it will completely encircle and dangerously menace vital 
interests of the United States. 

*               *                 *              *              *

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            399

This situation, precipitated solely by Japanese aggression, holds 
unmistakable threats to our interests, especially our interest in peace 
and in peaceful trade, and to our responsibility for the security of the 
Philippine Archipelago. The successful defense of the United States, in 
a military sense. Is dependent upon supplies of vital materials which we 
import in large quantities from this region of the world. To permit 
Japanese domination and control of the major sources of world supplies 
of tin and rubber and tungsten would jeopardize our safety in a manner 
and to an extent that cannot be tolerated. Along with this would go 
practical Japanese control of the Pacific. 

Unless the present course of events in the Far East is halted and 
considerations of justice, humanity, and fair dealing are restored, we 
will witness in that region of the world precisely what has already 
transpired throughout the continental limits of Europe where Hitler 
seeks dominion by ruthless force (ex. 19). 

It was then pointed out that throughout the period in which Japan had 
been making it clear that this was her program, the Government of the 
United States had endeavored to persuade the Government of Japan that 
Japan's best interests lay in maintaining and cultivating friendly 
relations with the United States and other countries that believe in 
orderly and peaceful processes. Reference was made to the 8 months of 
conversations with the Japanese which had been carried on by the 
Secretary of State and the President for the purpose of arriving, if 
possible, at some understanding agreeable to both Governments, and the 
principles for which the United States had stood, as set forth in the 
United States note of November 26 to Japan, were summarized. It was 
stated that in this effort the United States Government had had the 
agreement and support of the Governments of Great Britain, Australia, 
the Netherlands, and China. Every effort had been made, it was said, 
toward reaching a fair and workable agreement, and to commit Japan to 
practices in line with the principles advocated by the United States. 

These efforts, the proposed message continued, had failed, and Japan had 
refused to change her position or her practices, an(l relations between 
the two nations were threatened with rupture. The supreme question 
presented to the United States, it was said, was the question of self-
defense; the immediate question was whether the United States would, or 
would not, stand by while Japan went forward with a program of conquest. 
The effects of that program of conquest, if successful, on China and the 
Philippines were then described, and it was said that- 

If the Japanese should carry out their now threatened attacks upon, and 
were to succeed in conquering, the regions which they are menacing in 
the southwestern Pacific, our commerce with the Netherlands East Indies 
and Malaya would be at their mercy and probably be cut off. Our imports 
from those regions are of vital importance to us. We need those imports 
in time of peace. With the spirit of exploitation and destruction of 
commerce which prevails among the partners in the Axis Alliance, and 
with our needs what they are now in this period of emergency, an 
interruption of our trade with that area would be catastrophic (ex. 19). 

The proposed message then concluded by stating that the United States 
did not want war with Japan, but that if war should come, the fault and 
responsibility would be those of Japan, and that the primary cause would 
have been the pursuit by Japan of a policy of aggression. The policy of 
the United States and its relation with Japan should not be influenced 
by fear of what attacks, acting unlawfully and with resort to force, 
Japan might make upon the United States- 

but by determination on our part to give the utmost support of which we 
are reasonably capable to the fundamental principles of order and 
security and 

400             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

justice to which we have been and are committed, with confidence that it 
is within our capacity to withstand any attack which anyone may make 
upon us because of our pursuit of that course (ex. 19)."

Also on November 29 (Washington time), the British Ambassador called on 
Secretary Hull to learn of any further developments in the Japanese 
situation, especially with reference to the question of the proposed 
modus vivendi. As Secretary Hull described the conversation: 

"This caused me to remark in a preliminary way that the mechanics for 
the carrying on of diplomatic relations between the governments 
resisting aggressor nations are so complicated that it is nearly 
impossible to carry on such relations in a manner at all systematic and 
safe and sound. I referred to the fact that Chiang Kai-shek, for 
example, has sent numerous hysterical cable messages to different 
Cabinet officers and high officials in the Government other than the 
State Department, and sometimes even ignoring the President, intruding 
into a delicate and serious situation with no real idea of what the 
facts are. I added that Chiang Kai-shek has his brother-in-law, located 
here in Washington, disseminate damaging reports at times to the press 
and others, apparently with no particular purpose in mind; that we have 
correspondents from London who interview different officials here, which 
is entirely their privilege to do, except that at times we all move too 
fast without fully understanding each other's views, et cetera, et 
cetera. I stated that this was well illustrated in the case of the 
recent outburst by Chiang Kai-shek. In referring to this I remarked that 
it would have been better if, when Churchill received Chiang Kai-shek's 
loud protest about our negotiations here with Japan, instead of passing 
the protest on to us without objection on his part, thereby qualifying 
and virtually killing what we knew were the individual views of the 
British Government toward these negotiations, he had sent a strong cable 
back to Chiang Kai-shek telling him to brace up and fight with the same 
zeal as the Japanese and the Germans are displaying instead of weakening 
and telling the Chinese people that all of the friendly countries were 
now striving primarily to protect themselves and to force an agreement 
between China and Japan, every Chinese should understand from such a 
procedure that the best possible course was being pursued and that this 
calls for resolute fighting until the undertaking is consummated by 
peace negotiations which Japan in due course would be obliged to enter 
into with China. 

"*I expressed the view that the diplomatic part of our relations with 
Japan was virtually over and that the matter will now go to the 
officials of the Army and the Navy with whom I have talked and to whom I 
have given my views for whatever they are worth. Speaking in great 
confidence, I said that it would be a serious mistake for our country 
and other countries interested in the Pacific situation to make plans of 
resistance without including the possibility that Japan may move 
suddenly and with every possible element of surprise and spread out over 
considerable areas and capture certain positions and posts before the 
peaceful countries interested in the Pacific would have time to confer 
and formulate plans to meet these new conditions; that this would be on 
the theory that the Japanese recognize that their course of unlimited 
conquest now renewed all along the line probably is a desperate gamble 
and requires the utmost boldness and risk.*

"*I also said to the Ambassador that a calm deliberate Japanese 
Government would more than ever desire to wait another thirty days to 
see whether the German Army is driven out of Russia by winter. I added 
that the extremist fire-eating elements in Japan who have preached a 
general forward movement supported by the Army and Navy have influenced 
a vast portion of the Japanese public to clamor for such a movement, 
would probably take no serious notice of the Russian-German situation 
but would go forward in this desperate undertaking which they have 
advocated for some time; that at least it would be a mistake not to 
consider this possibility as entirely real, rather than to assume that 
they would virtually halt and engage in some movements into Thailand and 
into the Burma Road while waiting the results on the Russian front. The 
Ambassador, I think, had his reservations on this latter point. He did 
not disagree with what I said about the badly confused mechanics for the 
conduct of diplomatic relations between several of our countries in 
these critical times (ex. 18). *"

Also that day the Australian Minister, Mr. Casey, called on Secretary 
Hull and intimated that he was prepared to suggest to the Japanese 
Ambassador that Australia would be glad to act as mediator between Japan 
and the United States. In his memorandum of the 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         401

conversation, Secretary Hull noted that he gave the matter no serious 
attention, except to tell the Minister- 

"that the diplomatic stage was over and that nothing would come of a 
move of that kind. I interrupted him to make this conclusive comment 
before the Minister could make a detailed statement of the matter on the 
assumption that he would develop a set of facts along lines that he 
began to intimate (ex. 174)."

That afternoon the State Department received from Ambassador Grew the 
text of a Japanese note protesting the alleged flight of an American 
airplane over the island of Formosa on November 20, claiming this was a 
violation of Japanese territory and requesting that the matter "be 
brought to the attention of the United States authorities concerned." 
Ambassador Grew was informed on December 6 (Washington time) that the 
requested action had been taken, and that on November 24 an unidentified 
airplane had carried out a reconnaissance of Guam (ex. 130). The same 
afternoon (November 29) Secretary Hull received a request from the 
British Ambassador for a copy of the text of the United States' note of 
November 26 to send to the British Foreign Minister, to whom the general 
character of the note had previously been communicated (ex. 158). A copy 
of the note was sent to the Ambassador by Under Secretary Welles the 
following Tuesday (tr. 1338). Also that afternoon the State Department 
instructed American diplomatic and consular offices at Saigon, Bangkok 
and Singapore to report "all movements of military or naval units" 
promptly to the American Consul at Manila, who was told to transmit such 
information to Admiral Hart, the Commander in Chief of the Asiatic Fleet 
(ex. 21). 

Overshadowing the other events of the day, however, was an Associated 
Press report of a speech made by Premier Tojo in Tokyo before a rally 
sponsored by the "Imperial Rule Assistance Association" and the "Dai 
Nippon East Asia League," in commemoration of the first anniversary of 
the Joint Declaration by the Governments of Japan and Manchukuo and the 
Wang Ching-wei regime in Japanese-occupied China (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 
122). [1] In his speech, Premier Tojo said: 

"It is certainly the most fortunate lot of the three powers to have the 
privilege of collaborating together under this banner for cutting open 
the thorny way, and 1 year has already gone by since we started this 
honorable work together, and if it is not the greatest task of the 
present century what else can it be. 

"However if we look around we find that there are still many countries 
who are indulging in actions hostile to us. In fact they are trying to 
throw obstacles in the way of the construction of the East Asia co-
prosperity sphere and are trying to enjoy the dream of exploitation of 
East Asia at the cost of the 1,000 million populace of the East Asiatic 
peoples to satisfy their greed of possession. 

"The fact that Chiang Kai-shek is dancing to the tune of Britain, 
America, and communism at the expense of able-bodied and promising young 
men in his futile resistance against Japan is only due to the desire of 
Britain and the United States to fish in the troubled waters of East 
Asia by pitting the East Asiatic peoples against each other and to grasp 
the hegemony of East Asia. This is a stock in trade of Britain and the 
United States. 

"For the honor and pride of mankind we must purge this sort of practice 
from East Asia with a vengeance (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 148)."

The reports of this speech by Premier Tojo commenced coming in on 
November 29, the date fixed by Foreign Minister Togo as the final 
deadline before which Ambassador Nomura was to obtain the written 

[1] Extracts from Premier Tojo's speech were carried in American 
newspapers on November 30 under such headlines as "Japan Threatens to 
Purge Asia of U. S. And Britain" (Washington Post, November 30, 1941). 

402             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

agreement of the United States to the Japanese demands of November 20 or 
else things would "automatically" begin to happen (ex. 1, p. 165). It 
must be assumed Secretary Hull was aware of this and of the Foreign 
Minister's message to Ambassador Nomura stating that the negotiations 
would be de facto ruptured within 2 or 3 days (ex. 1, p. 195). 

Late Saturday evening, November 29 (Washington time), Secretary Hull 
telephoned President Roosevelt at Warm Springs and had a lengthy 
conversation with him, after which the President's press secretary told 
reporters: 

"In view of the reported statement-an Associated Press dispatch by the 
Premier of Japan, the President tonight is of the opinion that he may 
have to leave Warm Springs tomorrow afternoon, arranging the railroad 
schedule so as to arrive in Washington Monday before noon (tr. 14337)."

Secretary Hull testified that "the gravity of the situation was evident 
from many sources", and that as Premier Tojo's statement reflected the 
extreme acuteness of the situation, "in that sense it may be said that 
the statement prompted my telephone call and the President's return" 
(Tr. 14,340). 

In the meantime, after cabling Ambassador Nomura on November 28 (Japan 
time) that he did not wish the Ambassador "to give the impression that 
the negotiations are broken off" (ex. 1, p. 195), Foreign Minister Togo 
had followed up that message with another the next day in which he 
instructed the Ambassador: 

"*We wish you would make one more attempt verbally along the following 
lines:* 

"The United States government has (always?) taken a fair and judicial 
position and has formulated its policies after full consideration of the 
claims of both sides. 

"However, the Imperial Government is at a loss to understand why it has 
now taken the attitude that the new proposals we have made cannot be 
made the basis of discussion, but instead has made new proposals which 
ignore actual conditions in East Asia and would greatly injure the 
prestige of the Imperial Government. 

"With such a change of front in their attitude toward the China problem, 
what has become of the basic objectives that the U. S. Government has 
made the basis of our negotiations during these seven months? On these 
points we would request careful self-reflection on the part of the 
United States government. 

"*(In carrying out this instruction, please be careful that this does 
not lead to anything like a breaking off of negotiations)* (ex. 1, p. 
199)." 

This message was translated and available in Washington on Sunday, 
November 30 (Washington time). Late that evening Ambassador Kurusu 
telephoned Bureau Chief Yamamoto in Tokyo that arrangements had been 
made for the two Ambassadors to meet with Secretary Hull the next 
morning, Monday. The Ambassador reported that President Roosevelt was 
returning to Washington the next day because of Premier Tojo's speech, 
and cautioned against such "ill-advised statements," saying that it put 
the two Ambassadors "in a very difficult position." When Yamamoto urged 
the Ambassador to continue the negotiations, Ambassador Kurusu said they 
would need Tokyo's help, and both the Premier and the Foreign Minister 
would need "to change the tone of their speeches."  Ambassador 
continued:

"Actually the real problem we are up against is the effects of 
happenings in the South.  You understand that don't you? (Ex. 1, p. 
207)"

Yamamoto replied:

"Yes, yes (ex. 1, p. 207)."

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            403

Secretary Hull testified that he telephoned the President that Sunday 
[1] "after conferring With our military regarding the Japanese Prime 
Minister's bellicose statement and the increasing gravity of the Far 
Eastern situation" (tr. 1163). The record shows that the Secretary had 
two telephone conversations that morning with Admiral Stark at 10:30 and 
12:08 o'clock (tr. 1167). Admiral Stark attended the Secretary's 
conference with President Roosevelt at 11:45 a. m. The next day 
immediately following the President's return to Washington, and it would 
seem probable that the arrangement for Admiral Stark to attend that 
conference was made during the Secretary's telephone conversations with 
him. 

At 1:28 o'clock Sunday afternoon there was received in the State 
Department, through Ambassador Winant in London, the following message 
from Prime Minister Churchill for President Roosevelt: 

"It seems to me that one important method remains unused in averting war 
between Japan and our two countries, namely a plain declaration, secret 
or public as may be thought best, that any further act of aggression by 
Japan will lead immediately to the gravest consequence. I realize your 
constitutional difficulties but it would be tragic if Japan drifted into 
war by encroachment without having before her fairly and squarely the 
dire character of a further aggressive step. I beg you to consider 
whether, *at the moment which you judge right which may be very near*, 
you should not say that "any further Japanese aggression would compel 
you to place the gravest issues before Congress", or words to that 
effect. We would, of course, make a similar declaration or share in a 
joint declaration, and in any ease arrangements are being made to 
synchronize our action with yours. Forgive me, my dear friend, for 
presuming to press such a course upon you, but I am convinced that it 
might make all the difference and prevent a melancholy extension of the 
war (ex. 24)."

Also that Sunday both the Australian Minister, Mr. Casey, and the 
British Ambassador, Lord Halifax, called on Secretary Hull. The 
Australian Minister gave the Secretary the substance of a talk he had 
had with Ambassador Kurusu. Secretary Hull recorded: 

"This amounted to very little and there was really nothing new in what 
he said except that Kurusu made it repeatedly clear that the Japanese 
were very desirous of continuing conversations with this Government. The 
Minister then referred to his notes and said that the British Ambassador 
desired to urge, along with him, the Australian Minister, that I do the 
best possible to continue our relations with Japan so as to avoid a 
military conflict at this time, the idea being that they needed more 
time for preparation to resist in the Pacific area. This view has been 
asserted constantly during recent weeks by the British Ambassador, the 
Australian Minister, and twice by the Netherlands Minister (ex. 168)."

One of the purposes of the British Ambassador's call was to hand 
Secretary Hull the following memorandum:
 
"MOST SECRET

"There are important indications that Japan is about to attack Thailand 
and this attack will include a sea-borne expedition to seize strategic 
points in the Kra isthmus. 

"We have plans for the rapid movement of a force from Malaya to hold a 
line across the Kra isthmus in the neighborhood of Singora. Time is the 
essence of this plan, particularly at this season of the year when the 
Kra isthmus is water logged. Consequently great tactical advantage lies 
with the side which gets there first. 

"R. A. F. are reconnoitering on arc of 180 miles from Tedta Bharu for 
three days commencing November 29th and our Commander in Chief, Far East 
has requested Commander in Chief, Asiatic Fleet at Manila to undertake 
air recon-

[1] Newspaper accounts of Secretary Hull's s activities that Sunday 
state that the Secretary again telephoned President Roosevelt at Warm 
Springs before his departure for Washington (Washington Post, December 
1, 1941).

404             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

naissance on line Manila-Camranh Bay on the same days. Commander in 
Chief Far East, has asked for permission to move into Kra isthmus, if 
air reconnaissance establishes the fact that escorted Japanese ships are 
approaching the coast of Thailand, and he asks for an immediate decision 
on this point. 

"To allow the Japanese to establish themselves so near the Malay 
frontier would be an obvious threat to Singapore even though at the 
present season it might not develop at once. We have also to bear in 
mind the encouragement which the Japanese success would give to their 
extremists. Demands of appetite would grow and other Far East peoples 
would be correspondingly depressed. It looks therefore as though, to 
ensure the defense of Singapore and for wider reasons we might have to 
take the proposed action to forestall the Japanese (ex. 21)."

In his memorandum of his conversation with the British Ambassador 
Secretary Hull stated that the Ambassador- 

"was very desirous of ascertaining what the United States would do if 
the British should resist any Japanese undertaking to establish a base 
on the Kra Isthmus. *I said that the President was returning tomorrow 
morning and that I would lay all phases of the situation before him on 
Monday noon. This I proceeded later to do and the President agreed to 
notify and see the Ambassador later with respect to his inquiry*. * * * 
The Ambassador continued his attitude of desiring more time for his 
Government to make preparations to resist in the Pacific area. He 
assured me that his Government would be in harmony with any steps that 
we might pursue to this end (ex. 21)."

The next day Lord Halifax sent Secretary Hull a copy of a telegram he 
had received from the British Foreign Office, "as the point may possibly 
arise in the course of your discussions this morning." "You will 
remember," he wrote the Secretary, "you mentioned the point to me as I 
was leaving your office yesterday" (ex. 158). The Foreign Office 
telegram was as follows: 

"It is conceivable that United States Government may raise with you the 
question of the compatibility of the operation referred to with our 
treaty of nonaggression with Thailand. It may be useful for you to know 
therefore that we have given careful consideration to this point. 

"In July last we informed the Thai Government that we should regard the 
grant of bases to Japan as an infraction of that treaty.  Similarly 
(although we have as yet made no communication to the Thai Government) 
we should not feel we could allow the treaty to be a bar to our entering 
Thailand if a Japanese invasion occurred or was clearly impending.  But 
it would be greatly preferable if in these eventualities we could act in 
co-operation with the Thai Government.  If therefore it were decided to 
undertake the operation, we should naturally do our best to secure 
Thai's consent. It would be important however not to reveal to the Thai 
Government prematurely the existence of our plan owing to the danger of  
leakage to the Japanese (ex. 158). 

Thus the record before the Committee shows that as President Roosevelt 
returned to Washington from Warm Springs, the information available to 
his advisors in Washington indicated that a crisis was fast approaching, 
if not already at hand.

A series of intercepted Japanese messages that were translated and 
available in Washington the next day, December 1 (Japan time), fully 
confirmed this view. In a telegram dated December 1 (Japan time) to 
Ambassador Nomura, the Japanese Foreign Minister told the Ambassador 
that- 

"The date set in my message No. 812 has come and gone and the situation 
continues to be increasingly critical. However, to prevent the United 
States from becoming unduly suspicious, we have been instructing the 
Press and others that though there are some wide differences between 
Japan and the United States, the negotiations are continuing. 

(The above is for only your information) (ex. 1, p. 208). 

That same day the Japanese Foreign Office informed the Ambassador that 
its four offices "in London, Hongkong, Singapore, and Manila 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK          405

have been instructed to abandon the use of the code machines and to 
dispose of them," and that the machine in Batavia had been returned to 
Japan (ex. 1, p. 209). From a message dated November 29 from the 
Japanese Ambassador in Thailand to Foreign Minister Togo in Tokyo, it 
was learned that the Ambassador was conspiring with the pro-Japanese 
faction in Thailand to place that country in a position where it would 
be compelled to declare war on Great Britain. The Japanese Ambassador in 
Thailand reported to Tokyo that the question of joint military action 
between Thailand and Japan had been brought up in the Thai Government, 
but that the Government had expressed a desire to pursue a course of 
strict neutrality. He told Foreign Minister Togo that the Thai 
Government- 

"had taken a fairly firm stand that the first one, regardless of whether 
they be Britain or Japan, who makes the first move shall be considered 
Thai's enemy. Therefore, for Japan to be looked upon as Thai's helper, 
she should put Britain in a position to be the first aggressor. *For the 
purpose of accomplishing this Japan should carefully avoid Thai 
territory, and instead, land troops in the neighborhood of Kotaparu in 
British territory, which would almost certainly force Britain to invade 
Thailand from Patanbessa.*

"*The consequence would be Thai's declaration of war on Britain.* This 
strategy is being given careful consideration. Apparently this plan has 
the approval of Chief of Staff Bijitto. Our naval Attache has advised 
the Naval General Staff also, I think (ex. 1, p. 203)."

While the record before the committee shows that all of these Japanese 
messages were translated and available in Washington on December 1, it 
does not show the exact hour when translation was completed. It 
therefore cannot be said with certainty which, if any, of the messages 
were seen by Secretary Hull before his conference with the Japanese 
Ambassadors that morning, or which of the messages were seen by 
President Roosevelt, Secretary Hull, and Admiral Stark before their 
conference immediately after the President's return to Washington from 
Warm Springs. 

[**THE INVASION OF THAILAND BY JAPANESE FORCES FROM FRENCH INDOCHINA APPEARS IMMINENT**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(December 1-7, 1941)**

Thus on December 1 (Washington time) there was much information in 
Washington that pointed toward Thailand as the next objective of 
Japanese aggression. Geographically, Thailand lies between French 
Indochina on the east and Burma on the west, and, with the Gulf of Siam, 
between French Indochina on the northeast and the British Malay States 
on the south. After the Japanese occupation of southern French Indochina 
in late July, Thailand thus became a barrier between those forces and 
two possible objectives, the Burma Road on the one hand and Singapore on 
the other. This strategic location of Thailand had been emphasized by 
General Marshall and Admiral Stark in their joint memorandum of November 
5 (Washington time) when they concluded that no military action against 
Japan should be undertaken by the United States unless, among other 
contingencies, the Japanese should move their forces "into Thailand to 
the west of 100  east (i. e., toward the Burma Road) or south of 10  
north" (i. e., toward Singapore) (ex. 16). 

It is desirable here to review briefly the situation with respect to 
Thailand as it had developed since July. The record before the Com-

406             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

mittee shows that after the Japanese invasion and occupation of French 
Indochina late in July, the Thai Government, fully aware of Thailand's 
strategic position and importance to the Japanese, on August 12 
(Washington time) had formally asked the State Department whether, in 
the event Thailand should be attacked and should resist attack, the 
United States Government would extend material assistance to it, the 
Thai Government having determined and formally announced that it would 
defend itself against attack by any other country. Mr. Maxwell M. 
Hamilton, then Chief of the State Department's Far Eastern Division, to 
whom the question was presented, had advised the Thai Minister that the 
matter would be taken up with higher officers of the Department and that 
he would then communicate further with the Minister (ex. 169, item 6). 
The Thai Minister had previously made informal inquiry of the State 
Department to the same effect, after Secretary Hull had stated at a 
press conference on August 6 (Washington time) that the United States 
was becoming increasingly concerned over events in the southwestern 
Pacific area (ex. 169, item 1-6). Again on August 14, the Thai Minister 
had called at the State Department and stated that he had received 
another telegram from his Government which, "in the gravity of its tone, 
indicated that a critical state had been reached in respect of the 
threat of invasion." He had further stated that he had been instructed 
"to spare no effort to obtain an expression of the views of the American 
Government in this situation," and that the Thai Government was ready 
and able to purchase in America the arms it needed (ex. 169, item 7). 

On August 15 (Washington time) the State Department had received from 
the United States Minister at Batavia in the Netherlands East Indies a 
telegram containing the substance of a message from the Netherlands 
Minister of Colonies in London to the Governor-General of the 
Netherlands East Indies. In it the Minister of Colonies advised the 
latter that he had been assured by the British Foreign Minister that in 
the event of an attack by Japan upon the Netherlands East Indies; the 
British Empire would back up the Netherlands completely. The Governor-
General was also advised that a further conference would soon be held in 
London with the British Foreign Minister in this connection- 

"since it has become clear now that the United States and England will 
not resist Japanese occupation of Thailand with force of arms. It is 
also brought to your attention that any guarantee or certainty of United 
States participation by force of arms is absolutely excluded (ex. 169, 
item 8)."

Secretary Hull had conferred with the Thai Minister in Washington on 
August 18 (Washington time). In reply to the Minister's previous 
inquiries as to the attitude of the United States Government toward 
Thailand if Thailand should be attacked and should endeavor in good 
faith to defend itself, Secretary Hull had stated that the United States 
had been aiding China in many ways against the aggression of Japan and 
that, in the contingencies mentioned, the United States Government would 
place Thailand in the same category (ex. 169, item 9). 

The next action of importance in connection with Thailand appears to 
have occurred on October 27 (Washington time), when the British Minister 
in Washington, Sir Ronald Campbell, discussed the Thailand situation 
with Under Secretary Welles and left with him two memoranda dated 
October 25 dealing with possible material aid to 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         407

Thailand, including guns, ammunition, planes and aviation gasoline and 
lubricating oil, by Great Britain and the United States (ex. 169, item 
13). It will be recalled that it was about this time that Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek had appealed to Great Britain and the United States for 
planes and pilots to defend the Burma Road against an anticipated attack 
by the Japanese from northern French Indochina. The American reply to 
the British memoranda of October 25 had been delayed in order that both 
of these matters could be considered at the same time (ex. 169, item 
11). On November 6 (Washington time), that reply, in the form of an aide 
memoire, had been handed to the British Minister (ex. 169, item 13). The 
aide memoire pointed out that for some weeks it had been the policy of 
the United States Government to give sympathetic consideration to 
priority and export applications filed on behalf of the Thai Government 
and, whenever practicable in the face of demand from other areas upon 
American production, to take favorable action upon such applications. 
Regarding the proposals contained in the British memoranda, the United 
States reply commented that the British proposal to require the 
acceptance of British instructors along with the howitzers and field 
guns which were to be offered to the Thai Government might serve as a 
pretext upon which the Japanese Government might exert additional 
pressure upon Thailand. As to planes, the memoranda suggested that the 
British might wish to consider the release to Thailand of a number of 
airplanes at Singapore which it was understood were in excess of the 
number for which pilots were available there. If this should not be 
practicable, it was suggested that if the British should decide to make 
available to Thailand planes from those being supplied to it from the 
United States, the United States Government would be agreeable to such 
an arrangement. Concerning aviation gasoline and lubricating oil, it was 
stated that a reply would be made in the near future, after further 
investigation (ex. 169, item 13). 

On November 18 (Washington time) the State Department had advised the 
American Minister at Bangkok that it had explored the possibility of 
making available to the Thai Government antitank and antiaircraft guns 
and ammunition, but that it had been found impossible to spare any of 
such items at the moment (ex. 169, item 15). Four days later, on 
November 22 (Washington time), the State Department had advised the 
American Minister at Bangkok that the question of supplying planes to 
Thailand had been under active consideration by the British and the 
United States Governments but that neither Government was in a position 
to supply any planes to Thailand at the present time. The Minister had 
been advised that the supplying of aviation gasoline and aviation 
lubricating oil had also been under consideration, and that the British 
Government was prepared to furnish limited amounts of aviation gasoline 
and the United States Government was endeavoring to arrange to supply 
aviation lubricating oil (ex. 169, item 16). The same day reports had 
reached the State Department from the British Embassy of Japanese 
requests for the use of Thai airfields for "survey flights" and for 
aviation gasoline, presumably for such flights (ex. 169, item 17). 

The British Ambassador, Lord Halifax, had called on Under Secretary 
Welles on November 25 (Washington time) regarding a report from the 
British Minister at Bangkok that the Thai Government was again becoming 
very shaky and that unless some practical action were 

408             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

taken by Great Britain and the United States the Japanese influence 
would again become predominant. The British Ambassador had reported that 
title aviation gasoline and artillery the British had given the Thai 
Government had been regarded by the latter as completely insufficient 
"and had had no appreciably beneficial effects." When Lord Halifax had 
said that the Thai Government was urgently desirous of obtaining 
airplanes, the Under Secretary had said that the United States was 
building up its air strength as rapidly as possible in the Philippines 
and that he had been informed by both General Marshall and Admiral Stark 
that the planes the United States had in the Philippines were infinitely 
more valuable to the United States there than they would be in Thailand. 
The British Ambassador had then suggested on behalf of his Government 
that the situation "might be ameliorated by a credit of $10,000,000 to 
Thailand by the United States." Under Secretary Welles had said that 
this matter would be given immediate consideration (ex. 169, item 18). 

On November 27 (Washington time) the State Department had advised the 
American Minister at Bangkok concerning renewed instructions which were 
given on November 22 to American diplomatic and consular officers in 
Japanese-occupied areas of China, Hongkong and French Indochina 
regarding the withdrawal of American citizens from those areas, and had 
authorized him to inform American citizens in Thailand of those 
instructions (ex. 169, item 20). The next day the Thai Minister had 
called at the State Department and stated that he feared a Japanese 
attack on Thailand was imminent. He had said that Thailand would resist 
any such attack with all its forces. Referring to the statement 
previously made to him that the United States would place Thailand in 
the same category as China and would offer assistance in the case of an 
attack by an aggressor, he had suggested that immediate consideration be 
given to making planes and other supplies available to Thailand. He had 
been advised that the matter would be promptly brought to the attention 
of the appropriate authorities (ex. 169, item 23). 

On November 29 (Washington time) the State Department had received a 
telegram from the American Minister at Bangkok stating that on the 
previous day the Thai Prime Minister had urged his people to be neutral 
but to prepare to fight if war became inevitable. The Thai Prime 
Minister had been reported as saying- 

"that Great Britain and the United States had promised not to attack 
Thailand and that the Japanese Ambassador had guaranteed that Japanese 
troops in Indo-China are not intended for attack on this country in any 
circumstances (ex. 169, item 28)."

On December 1 (Washington time), the day President Roosevelt returned to 
Washington, from Warm Springs, the Thai Minister, accompanied by his 
military attache, called at the State Department and described in detail 
the general military situation in Thailand, stating that the military 
equipment now most urgently needed by Thailand was heavy artillery, 
bombing planes, and pursuit planes. The Minister expressed the hope that 
means could be found to make this equipment available immediately in 
order that Thailand might be better able to resist aggression by Japan 
(ex. 169, item 26). 

The following day the State Department sent a telegram to the American 
Consul at Singapore requesting him to render all possible assistance in 
connection with the immediate delivery of small quanti-

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         409

ties of appropriate aviation lubricating oils to Thailand, arrangements 
for which, the Department said, had been tentatively agreed upon between 
representatives of this Government and representatives in Washington of 
the British and the Netherland Governments (ex. 169 item 28). 

[**GERMANY TELLS JAPAN THE TIME IS RIPE TO STRIKE AT THE UNITED STATES, AND PROMISES TO JOIN WITH JAPAN IN WAR AGAINST THE UNITED STATES**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(November 29, 1941)**

Several additional intercepted Japanese messages between Tokyo and 
Berlin that were translated and available in Washington on December 1 
(Washington time) disclosed that Germany once again was exercising 
pressure upon Japan under the Tripartite Pact. In a message dated 
November 29, 1941, from the Japanese Ambassador Oshima, in Berlin to 
Foreign Minister Togo, the Ambassador reported a conversation he had had 
with Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop the day before, following a 
conference of high German Government and military officials at the 
official residence of Chancellor Hitler. The Ambassador reported that it 
was an absolute certainty that at that conference Japan's moves were 
discussed in connection with discussion of the German war against 
Russia. He quoted von Ribbentrop as saying: 

"It is essential that Japan effect the New Order in East Asia without 
losing this opportunity. There never has been and probably never will be 
a time when closer cooperation under the Tripartite Pact is so 
important. If Japan hesitates at this time, and Germany goes ahead and 
establishes her European New Order all the military might of Britain and 
the United States will be concentrate against Japan.

"As Fuehrer Hitler said today, there are fundamental differences in the 
very right to exist between Germany and Japan, and the United States. We 
have received advice to the effect that there is practically no hope of 
the Japanese-U. S. negotiations being concluded successfully, because of 
the fact that the United States is putting up a stiff front. 

"If this is indeed the fact of the case, and if Japan reaches a decision 
to fight Britain and the United States, I am confident that that will 
not only be to the interest of Germany and Japan jointly, but would 
bring about favorable results for Japan herself (ex. 1, p. 200)."

The Japanese Ambassador informed the Foreign Minister in Tokyo that von 
Ribbentrop had said that the Germans would like to end their war with 
Russia during the next year, and that he had then continued 

"should Japan become engaged in a war against the United States, 
Germany, of course, would join the war immediately. There is absolutely 
no possibility of Germany's entering into a separate peace with the 
United States under such circumstances. The Fuehrer is determined on 
that point (ex. 1, p. 202)."

Foreign Minister Togo replied to this message on November 30 (Japan 
time). His message was in three parts, only the first and third of which 
were ever intercepted. [1] Both of those parts were translated and 
available in Washington, however, on December 1 (Washington time): 

"1. The conversations begun between Tokyo and Washington last April 
during the administration of the former cabinet, in spite of the sincere 
efforts of the 

[1] In this connection, the War Department advised the Committee that 
the microfilms of Japanese files received from General MacArthur's 
headquarters did not contain the second part of this message (tr. 
13665). 

410             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Imperial Government, now stand ruptured-broken. (I am sending you an 
outline of developments in separate message #986.) In the face of this, 
our Empire faces a grave situation and must act with determination. Will 
Your Honor, therefore, immediately interview Chancellor Hitler and 
Foreign Minister Ribbentrop and confidentially communicate to them a 
summary of the developments. Say to them that lately England and the 
United States have taken a provocative attitude, both of them. Say that 
they are planning to move military forces into various places in East 
Asia and that we will inevitably have to counter by also moving troops. 
*Say very secretly to them that there is extreme danger that war may 
suddenly break out between the Anglo-Saxon nations and Japan through 
some clash of arms and add that the time of the breaking out of this war 
may come quicker than anyone dreams.*

*         *        *       *       *       *

"4. If, when you tell them this, the Germans and Italians question you 
about our attitude toward the Soviet, say that we have already clarified 
our attitude toward the Russians in our statement of last July. Say that 
by our present moves southward we do not mean to relax our pressure 
against the Soviet and that if Russia joins hands tighter with England 
and the United States and resists us with hostilities, we are ready to 
turn upon her with all our might; however right now, it is to our 
advantage to stress the south and for the time being we would prefer to 
refrain from any direct moves in the north. 

"5. This message is important from a strategic point of view and must 
under all circumstances be held in the most absolute secrecy. This goes 
without saying. Therefore, will you please impress upon the Germans and 
Italians how important secrecy is. 

"6. As for Italy, after our Ambassador in Berlin has communicated this 
to the Germans, he will transmit a suitable translation to Premier 
Mussolini and Foreign Minister Ciano. As soon as a date is set far a 
conference with the Germans and Italians, please let me know. 

"Will you please send this message also to Rome, together with the 
separate message (ex. 1, pp. 204-205)."

In the separate message (#986) referred to above, Foreign Minister Togo 
reviewed the course of the Japanese-American negotiations for Ambassador 
Oshima's benefit. He stated that during the 6 months of negotiations 

"the Imperial Government adamantly stuck to the Tripartite Alliance as 
the cornerstone of the international policy regardless of the 
vicissitudes of the international situation, and that Japan had based 
her hopes for a solution between Japan and the United States definitely 
within the scope of that Alliance (ex. 1, p. 205)."

The Foreign Minister said that the American and Japanese views on the 
question of the evacuation of Japanese troops from China and French 
Indochina "were completely in opposition to each other." He said that 
the United States had taken the position that as long as the Imperial 
Government of Japan was in alliance with Germany and Italy there could 
be no maintenance of friendly relations between Japan and the United 
States, and that the United States had begun to demonstrate a tendency 
to demand the divorce of the Japanese Government from the Tripartite 
Alliance. "That is to say," the Foreign Minister continued, 

"it has become gradually more and more clear that the Imperial 
Government could no longer continue negotiations with the United States. 
It became clear, too, that a continuance of negotiations would 
inevitably be detrimental to our cause. 

"3. The proposal presented by the United States on the 26th made this 
attitude of theirs clearer than ever. In it there is one insulting 
clause which says that no matter what treaty either party enters into 
with the third power it will not be interpreted as having any bearing 
upon the basic object of this treaty, namely the maintenance of peace in 
the Pacific. This means specifically the Three-Power Pact. It means that 
in case the United States enters the European war at any time the 
Japanese Empire will not be allowed to give assistance to Germany and 
Italy. It is clearly a trick. This clause alone, let alone others, makes 
it impossible to find any basis in the American proposal for 
negotiations. What is 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         411

more, before the United States brought forth this plan, they conferred 
with England, Australia, the Netherlands, and China-they did 80 
repeatedly. Therefore, it is clear that the United States is now in 
collusion with those nations and has decided to regard Japan along with 
Germany and Italy, as an enemy (ex. 1, p. 206)."

[**PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT RETURNS TO WASHINGTON AS THE FAR EASTERN SITUATION MOVES RAPIDLY TOWARD A CLIMAX**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(December 1, 1941)**

When the two Japanese Ambassadors called on Secretary Hull on Monday 
morning, December 1 (Washington time), it was their first conference 
with the Secretary since their meeting with him and President Roosevelt 
5 days before. Ambassador Nomura's description of their arrival at the 
State Department shows that many assumed the Ambassadors had requested 
the meeting with the Secretary to present the Japanese Government's 
reply to the American note of November 26. Ambassador Nomura reported to 
Tokyo: 

"Upon our arrival at the State Department we found not only 
newspapermen, but even some members of the Departmental staff crowding 
the corridors. Some of these spectators were of the opinion that the 
issue of war or peace was to be immediately decided upon. In general, 
the scene was highly dramatic (ex. 1, p. 210)."

At the start of the conference Ambassador Kurusu asked the reason for 
President Roosevelt's sudden return to Washington, and Secretary Hull 
indicated that one of the reasons was the recent "loud talk" of the 
Japanese Premier. The Ambassador endeavored to minimize the Premier's 
recent speech and stated, in accordance with the instructions he had 
received from Tokyo, that the American note of November 26 had been 
communicated to his Government and that within a few days the Japanese 
Government's observations concerning it would be presented to the 
Secretary. He said that his Government believed its proposals of 
November 20 to be equitable, and had found it difficult to understand 
the position taken by the United States Government. He had been 
directed, he said, to inquire what was the ultimate aim of the United 
States in the conversations and to request the United States Government 
to make "deep reflection of this matter." He said that the Japanese 
offer to withdraw its troops from southern French Indo-China still stood 
(ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 772-774)

Secretary Hull replied that the United States Government had to take 
into account the "bellicose utterances emanating from Tokyo" and that 
there never would be possible any peaceful arrangements if such 
arrangements had to be based upon principles of force. Later, the 
Secretary called attention to reports received from the press and other 
sources- 

"of heavy Japanese troop movements into Indochina and endeavored to make 
it clear that, when a large Japanese army is anywhere in Indochina, we 
have to give that situation all the more attention when Japanese 
statesmen say that they will drive us out of east Asia. He pointed out 
that we cannot be sure what the Japanese military leaders are likely to 
do, that we do not know where the Japanese Army intends to land its 
forces, and that for this reason we cannot sit still but will have to 
puzzle these things out in some way. The Secretary explained that this 
situation had been very painful to him and he did not know whether the 
Ambassador could do anything in the matter of influencing the Japanese 
Government. Mr. Kurusu said that he felt it was a shame that nothing 
should come 

412             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

out of the efforts which the conversations of several months had 
represented. He said he felt that the two sides had once been near an 
agreement except for two or three points, but that our latest proposals 
seem to carry the two sides further away than before. 

"The Secretary pointed out that every time we get started in the 
direction of progress the Japanese military does something to overturn 
us. The Secretary expressed grave doubts whether we could now get ahead 
in view of all the threats that had been made. He pointed out that the 
acts of the Japanese militarists had effectively tied the hands of the 
Ambassadors and he did not know whether the Ambassadors could succeed in 
having anything accomplished toward untying their hands. Mr. Kurusu 
brought up again his contention made on previous occasions that China 
had taken advantage of the Washington Conference treaties to flaunt 
Japan, and commented that if we don't look out China will sell both the 
United States and Japan down the river. The Secretary observed that he 
has been plowing through various contradictions in Japanese acts and 
utterances. He pointed out that the Japanese had been telling us that if 
something quick is not done something awful was about to happen; that 
they kept urging upon the Secretary the danger of delay, and kept 
pressing the Secretary to do something. He said that in view of all the 
confusion, threats and pressure, he had been brought to the stage where 
he felt that something must be done to clear the foggy atmosphere; that 
his conclusion was that he must bring us back to fundamentals, and that 
these fundamentals were embodied in the proposal which we had offered 
the Japanese on November 26. He said that we have stood from the first 
on the points involved in this proposal. He pointed out that everything 
that Japan was doing and saying was in precisely the opposite direction 
from the course we have been talking about in our conversations, and 
that these should be reversed by his government before we can further 
seriously talk peace (vol. II, pp. 775-776)."

The Secretary asked what possibility there was of peace-minded people 
coming out in Japan and expressing themselves, whether anybody in Japan 
would be free to speak unless he preached conquest. When the Ambassador 
commented that the Japanese People were not talking about conquest, 
Secretary Hull pointed out that everyone in America understood the 
implications of such terms as "New Order in East Asia" and "Co-
prosperity sphere". The Secretary went on to say: 

"that there was no reason for conflict between the United States and 
Japan, that there was no real clash of interests. He added that Japan 
does not have to use a sword to gain for herself a seat at the head of 
the table. He pointed out that equality of opportunity is in our opinion 
the key to the future peace and prosperity of all nations (ex. 29, vol. 
II, pp. 776-777)."

When Ambassador Kurusu, after remarking that war in the Pacific would be 
a tragedy, added that the Japanese people believed that the United 
States wanted to keep Japan fighting China, and to keep Japan strangled, 
and that they believed they were faced with the alternative of 
surrendering to the United States or fighting, Secretary Hull said that 
he had practically exhausted himself here, that the American people were 
going to assume that there was real danger to this country in the 
situation, and that there was nothing he could do to prevent it (ex. 29, 
vol. 2, p. 777). 

Ambassador Nomura reported to Foreign Minister Togo that during the 
conference Secretary Hull had emphasized: 

"The tone and trend of the 'Japanese Government's expressions and 
movements and that of the general public opinion organs, and the 
increase in strength of the garrisons in French Indo-China (ex. 1, p. 
210)."

He reported that from the beginning of the conference the Secretary had 
worn "a deeply pained expression," but that during the course of their 
explanations the Secretary "showed visible signs of relief (ex. 1, p. 
210). 

President Roosevelt reached Washington from Warm Springs shortly before 
noon on Monday, December 1, and went directly to

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         413

the White House for his conference with Secretary Hull and Admiral 
Stark. [1] It will be recalled that in Secretary Hull's memorandum of 
his conversation with the British Ambassador the day before, the 
Secretary stated that he laid before President Roosevelt on Monday " all 
phases" of the matters he discussed with the British Ambassador, which 
had included the Ambassador's inquiry as to "what the United States 
would do if the British should resist any Japanese undertaking to 
establish a base on the Kra Isthmus", and that "the President agreed to 
notify and see the Ambassador later with respect to his inquiry" (ex. 
21). Clearly, a further subject discussed at the White House conference 
was Secretary Hull's conversation that morning with the Japanese 
Ambassadors. It would also seem probable that at the conference the 
other events mentioned above that had occurred after the President's 
departure the preceding Friday were discussed. These included Secretary 
Hull's revised draft of the proposed message to Congress and the 
accompanying draft of a message to Hirohito; the significance of Premier 
Tojo's speech; the information received from the British Ambassador 
concerning a possible Japanese move into Thailand, which appeared to be 
confirmed that day by the intercepted Japanese message revealing the 
intrigues of the Japanese Ambassador in Thailand; Prime Minister 
Churchill's plea for similar or joint declarations by the United States 
and Great Britain that "any further act of aggression" would "lead 
immediately to the gravest consequence," at whatever moment the 
President should judge right "which may be very near"; and the 
intercepted Japanese messages showing that the Japanese Government was 
only making a pretense of continuing the conversations. In addition, the 
President, Secretary Hull, and Admiral Stark must be assumed to have 
seen either before or after the White House conference the exchange of 
messages between the Japanese Foreign Minister in Tokyo and the Japanese 
Ambassador in Berlin showing the strong German pressure on Japan to make 
war on Great Britain and the United States and the Japanese reply that 
"*war may suddenly break out between the Anglo Saxon nations and Japan * 
* * quicker than anyone dreams*." 

There is no evidence before the Committee of any meeting between 
President Roosevelt and the British Ambassador, Lord Halifax, during the 
period December 1-7 (Washington time), and no reference to such a 
meeting has been found in newspaper accounts of President Roosevelt's 
activities that week. However, the Washington Post reported on December 
2 that after the President's conference on December 1 with Secretary 
Hull and Admiral Stark, the President had a luncheon conference with Mr. 
Harry Hopkins, who had been driven to the White House from the Naval 
Hospital for that purpose, returning to the Naval Hospital after the 
conference; that thereafter 

[1] The next day referring to this meeting the Washington Post reported: 

"President Roosevelt yesterday assumed direct command of diplomatic and 
military moves relating to Japan as the lights of peace flickered low in 
the Orient and Kichisaburo Nomura, Japanese Ambassador told reporters 
that 'there must be wise statesmanship to save the situation.' 

"It was in a tense atmosphere that the President reached the White House 
from Warm Springs shortly before noon to receive a report from Secretary 
of State Hull on his conversation yesterday morning with official 
Japanese representatives and to confer with diplomatic, naval and 
personal advisers. 

"Washington reports indicate that Japan is massing troops in southern 
Indochina for a possible military move into Thailand which an 
authoritative statement made here last week indicated the United States 
could not tolerate. In Manila the leaves of United States naval and 
military forces have been canceled and London reports said military and 
air forces are being mobilized in the Netherlands East Indies 
(Washington Post December 2, 1941)."

414             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

the President called Under Secretary Welles to the White House for a 
brief conference, after which the Under Secretary "on orders" conferred 
briefly with Lord Halifax; and that after the latter conference Sir. 
Welles returned to the White House for a further conference with the 
President that lasted an hour and a half. The record before the 
Committee does not show what matters were discussed at the conference 
between Under Secretary Welles and the British Ambassador. [1]

In the absence of other evidence concerning the subjects discussed at 
the White House conference that noon, the evidence before the Committee 
of action taken that evening and the next morning at the direction of 
President Roosevelt is important. Just before midnight that day, 
December 1 (Washington time), the Navy Department sent the following 
dispatch, marked priority, to Admiral Hart, Commander in Chief of the 
United States Asiatic Fleet: 

"President directs that the following be done as soon as possible and 
within two days if possible after receipt this dispatch. Charter 3 small 
vessels to form a "defensive information patrol."  Minimum requirements 
to establish identity as U. S. men-of-war are command by a naval officer 
and to mount a small gun and 1 machine gun would suffice. Filipino crews 
may be employed with minimum number naval ratings to accomplish purpose 
which is to observe and report by radio Japanese movements in west China 
Sea and Gulf of Siam. One vessel to be stationed between Hainan and Hue, 
one vessel off the Indo-China coast between, Camranh Bay and Cape St. 
Jaques and one vessel off Pointe De Camau. Use of ISABEL authorized by 
President as one of the three but not other naval vessels. Report 
measures taken to carry out President's views. At the same time inform 
me as to what reconnaissance measures are being regularly performed at 
sea by both Army and Navy whether by air surface vessels or submarines 
and your opinion as to the effectiveness of these latter measures (ex. 
37)."

In Tokyo on December 1 (Japan time) the Japanese Cabinet met at the 
official residence of Premier Tojo. Domei, the authoritative Japanese 
news agency, issued a report stating that at the meeting the Japanese 
Cabinet had decided to continue negotiations with the United States, 
despite the divergence of views of the two Governments. In a telegram to 
Secretary Hull received the evening of December 1 (Washington time), 
Ambassador Grew reported that- 

"Tonight s newspapers reported that the Cabinet at its meeting today, 
while realizing the difficulty of adjusting the respective positions of 
the two countries, nevertheless determined to continue the Washington 
conversations (ex. 25)."

As already noted, Ambassador Grew testified before the Committee that 
although he knew that the Cabinet meeting took place, he "did not (know) 
and could not have guessed" that the Cabinet had discussed the attack on 
Pearl Harbor (tr. 1615). 

[1] The record before the Committee does, however, contain the 
following: On December 6, 1941, Captain John Creighton, the United 
States Naval Attache at Singapore, sent a message to Admiral Hart, 
commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet, at Manila which stated, among 
other things, that Brooke Popham (the British commander in chief at 
Singapore) received Saturday from War Department London quote: 'We have 
now received assurance of American armed support in cases as follows: 1. 
We are obliged execute our plans to forestall Japs landing Isthmus of 
Kra or take action in reply to Nips Invasion any other part of Siam * * 
*.' " (tr. 13520-13521) Captain Creighton testified before the Committee 
that he did not know or recall who it was that gave him the information 
upon which this message was based, or where that person had obtained the 
information, and that it was really nothing more than rumor (tr. 13530). 
Upon receipt of this message, Admiral Hart, on December 6, 1941, sent 
the following message to Admiral Stark in Washington: "Learn from 
Singapore we have assured Britain armed support under three or four 
eventualities. Have received no corresponding instructions from you." 
(Ex. 40) Admiral (now Senator) Hart testified that he never received a 
reply to his message (tr. 12850-12851). In this connection see also the 
discussion infra of the second message received by the State Department 
on December 6 (Washington time) from Ambassador Winant in London 
regarding the two Japanese naval convoys moving toward the Kra Isthmus 
in which Ambassador Winant said. Among other things: "British feel 
pressed for time in relation to guaranteeing support Thailand, fearing 
Japan might force them to invite invasion on pretext protection before 
British have opportunity to guarantee support but wanting to carry out 
President's wishes in message transmitted by Welles to Halifax" (ex. 21) 
and Under Secretary Welles testimony before the Committee in connection 
therewith. 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            415

However, it is now known that at this meeting the Japanese Cabinet gave 
its formal approval to the commencement of hostilities against the 
United States, and that immediately thereafter an Imperial Naval Order 
was issued on instructions from the Imperial General Headquarters: 

"Japan, under the necessity of her self-preservation and self-defense, 
has reached a position to declare war on the United States of America 
(tr. 438)."

By that time, the Japanese naval striking force which had left its 
rendezvous in northern Japan on November 25 (Washington time) had 
steamed nearly half the distance to Pearl Harbor. 

In Washington, however, Ambassador Nomura that day cabled the Foreign 
Minister there were indications that the United States desired to 
continue the negotiations "even if it is necessary to go beyond their 
stands on the so-called basic principles" (ex. 1, p. 213). 

He continued: 

"If it is impossible from the broad political viewpoint, to conduct a 
leaders' meeting at this time, would it not be possible to arrange a 
conference between persons in whom the leaders have complete confidence 
(for example, Vice President Wallace or Hopkins from the United States 
and the former Premier Konoye, who is on friendly terms with the 
President, or Adviser to the Imperial Privy Council Ishii). The meeting 
could be arranged for some midway point, such as Honolulu. High army and 
navy officers should accompany these representatives. Have them make one 
final effort to reach some agreement, using as the basis of their 
discussions the latest proposals submitted by each.

"We feel that this last effort may facilitate the final decision as to 
war or peace (ex. 1, p. 213)"

It seems doubtful that Ambassador Nomura would have sent this message, 
if in fact he knew that that day the Tojo Cabinet had formally approved 
the commencement of hostilities against the United States. The Foreign 
Minister's message in reply to the Ambassador's suggestion, which was 
translated and available in Washington on December 3 (Washington time), 
avoided any reference to the Cabinet's action: 

"As you are well aware, during the tenure of the previous cabinet, a 
meeting between the leaders of the two countries was suggested by us but 
the proposals failed to materialize. It is felt that it would be 
inappropriate for us to propose such a meeting again at this time. 
Please be advised of this decision (ex. 1, p. 224)."

[**PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT ASKS THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT TO EXPLAIN ITS PURPOSE IN MOVING ADDITIONAL TROOPS INTO SOUTHERN INDO-CHINA**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(December 2, 1941)**

The next day, Tuesday, December 2 (Washington time), the two Japanese 
Ambassadors called on Under Secretary Welles at the latter's request, 
Secretary Hull being ill and absent from the State Department. Under 
Secretary Welles told the Ambassadors that he had been asked by 
President Roosevelt to communicate to them the following, which he then 
read and handed to Ambassador Nomura: 

"I have received reports during the past days of continuing Japanese 
troop movements to southern Indochina. These reports indicate a very 
rapid and material increase in the forces of all kinds stationed by 
Japan in Indochina. 

"It was my clear understanding that by the terms of the agreement-and 
there is no present need to discuss the nature of that agreement-between 
Japan and the French Government at Vichy that the total number of 
Japanese forces per-

416             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

mitted by the terms of that agreement to be stationed in Indochina was 
very considerably less than the total amount of the forces already 
there. 

"The stationing of these increased Japanese forces in Indochina would 
seem to imply the utilization of these forces by Japan for purposes of 
further aggression, since no such number of forces could possibly be 
required for the policing of that region. Such aggression could 
conceivably be against the Philippine Islands; against the many islands 
of the East Indies; against Burma, against Malaya or either through 
coercion or through the actual use of force for the purpose of 
undertaking the occupation of Thailand. Such new aggression would, of 
course, be additional to the acts of aggression already undertaken 
against China, our attitude towards which is well known, and has been 
repeatedly stated to the Japanese Government. 

"Please be good enough to request the Japanese Ambassador and Ambassador 
Kurusu to inquire at once of the Japanese Government what the actual 
reasons may be for the steps already taken, and what I am to consider is 
the policy of the Japanese Government as demonstrated by this recent and 
rapid concentration of troops in Indochina. This Government has seen in 
the last few years in Europe a policy on the part of the German 
Government which has involved a constant and steady encroachment upon 
the territory and rights of free and independent peoples through the 
utilization of military steps of the same character. It is for that 
reason and because of the broad problem of American defense that I 
should like to know the intention of the Japanese Government (vol. II, 
p. 779)."

Ambassador Kurusu said that he was not informed by the Japanese 
Government of its intentions but that he would communicate the foregoing 
statement immediately to his Government. Then followed an inconclusive 
discussion of the general situation, during which Under Secretary Welles 
pointed out that the settlement which the United States was offering 
Japan in the United States note of November 26 (Washington time) was one 
which would assure Japan of peace and the satisfaction of Japanese 
economic needs much more certainly than any other alternative which 
Japan might feel was open to her. Ambassador Kurusu said that in view of 
the actual situation in the Far East there were points in the United 
States proposal of November 26 which the Japanese Government would find 
it difficult to accept. When asked by Under Secretary Welles whether a 
reply to the American proposal would be received from the Japanese 
Government, Ambassador Nomura answered in the affirmative, but said that 
it might take a few days in view of the important questions which it 
raised for the Japanese Government (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 778-781). 

In his report of this conversation to Foreign Minister Togo, Ambassador 
Nomura said: 

"Judging by my interview with Secretary of State HULL on the 1st and my 
conversations of today, it is clear that the United States, too, is 
anxious to peacefully conclude the current difficult situation. I am 
convinced that they would like to bring about a speedy settlement. 
Therefore, please bear well in mind this fact in your considerations of 
our reply to the new American proposals and to my separate wire #1233 
(ex. 1, pp. 222-223)."

Soon after his meeting with the two Japanese Ambassadors, Under 
Secretary Welles attended a meeting at noon at the White House at which, 
in addition to President Roosevelt and Mr. Welles, only Secretary 
Stimson and Secretary Knox were present. Secretary Stimson described the 
meeting in his notes as follows: 

"I left for the White House conference at 12:00 o'clock and there were 
present there just Knox, Sumner Welles and myself, as Hull is laid up 
with a cold. The President went step by step over the situation and I 
think has made up his mind to go ahead. He has asked the Japanese 
through Sumner Welles what they intend by this new occupation of 
southern Indo-China-just what they are going to do-and has demanded a 
quick reply. The President is still deliberating the possibility of a 
message to the Emperor, although all the rest of us are rather against 
it, 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK       417

but in addition to that he is quite settled, I think, and he will make a 
Message to the Congress and will perhaps back that up with a speech to 
the country. He said that he was going to take the matters right up when 
he left us (tr. 14,427)." 

That afternoon, at his press conference, President Roosevelt was asked- 

"if the Japanese marched into Thailand what would the United States 
Government do? The President evaded the question. Another correspondent 
asked if the President could give any indication of the nature of the 
information requested from the Japanese representatives this morning. 
The President said let us put it this way, and this answers again many 
questions at the same time. Since last April we have been discussing 
with the Japanese some method to arrive at an objective that is 
permanent peace in the whole area in the Pacific and at times it seemed 
that progress was being made. During the whole period up to the end of 
June we assumed that as both nations were negotiating toward that 
objective there would be no act contrary to the desired end of peace. We 
were therefore somewhat surprised when the Japanese Government sent 
troops to a specific over-all total into Indo-China after very brief 
negotiations with the Vichy Government at the conclusion of which the 
Vichy Government let it be understood clearly that they had agreed to 
this number of troops principally because they were powerless to do 
anything else. 

"Sometime later conversations were resumed with the United States and 
again we made it perfectly clear that the objective we were seeking 
meant the taking of no additional territory by anyone in the Pacific 
area. We received word the other day that there were large additional 
bodies of Japanese forces of various kinds, including troops, planes, 
war vessels, etc., in Indo-China and that other forces were on the way. 
Before these forces had arrived the number of forces already there had 
greatly exceeded the original amount agreed to by the French and the 
number on the way were much greater, and the question asked this morning 
very politely, at my request, was as to what the purpose and intention 
of the Japanese Government was as to the future, eliminating the 
necessity of policing Indochina which is a very peaceful spot and we 
hope to receive a reply in the near future. 

"In reply to a question as to whether any time for a reply had been set, 
the President said that there had naturally been no time limit set (ex. 
167)."

The same day Ambassador Nomura sent a special report to the Japanese 
Foreign Office concerning this press conference, as follows: 

"On the 2d in a press interview the President stated that he had sent us 
an inquiry that day concerning our increasing troops in French Indo-
China. Expressing his own views for the first time, he briefly stated 
that the trend of Japanese-American negotiations for the past few days 
and our rumored increasing of troops in southern French Indo-China had 
both thrown obstacles in the way of the progress of the negotiations 
(see special intelligence from Washington). This was the first interview 
since returning from Warm Springs, and particular attention is to be 
paid to the fact that he referred directly to negotiations (ex. 1, p. 
223)."

Also that day the first secretary of the Japanese Embassy, Mr. Terasaki, 
called on officials of the State Department's Far Eastern Division and 
delivered a document in which it was denied that Premier Tojo had ever 
made the speech attributed to him on November 30. Mr. Terasaki claimed 
that when Ambassador Kurusu referred to the Premier's speech in his 
telephone conversation with Bureau Chief Yamamoto the preceding Sunday 
evening, Yamamoto had been nonplused and had asked "What speech?" (ex. 
29, vol. II, pp. 777-778). The record of that telephone conversation 
before the Committee shows no such statement by Yamamoto; on the 
contrary Yamamoto is shown to have taken no exception to Ambassador 
Kurusu's references to the Premier's speech (ex. 1, pp. 206-207). That 
day the Chinese Ambassador, Dr. Hu Shih, delivered to the State 
Department a memorandum in further explanation of the position of the 
Chinese 

418             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Government on the modus vivendi, which ended by stating that the Chinese 
Foreign Minister had expressed- 

"great gratification in the latest reply of the Secretary (Hull) to the 
Japanese envoys, which, he understands, reaffirms the fundamental 
principles repeatedly enunciated by the United States Government (ex. 
18)."

Two intercepted Japanese messages bearing on Japanese-American relations 
generally were translated and available in Washington on Tuesday, 
December 2 (Washington time). One was a message sent from the Foreign 
Office in Tokyo to Washington on November 27 (Japan time), for 
retransmittal by Washington to Japanese diplomatic establishments in 
various North and South American cities. "With international relations 
becoming more strained," the message set up an emergency system of 
dispatches in hidden word codes to be used in communicating with those 
establishments. These emergency dispatches consisted of instructions 
regarding radio communications and the evacuation of Japanese Embassies, 
messages stating that relations between Japan and countries whose names 
were to be inserted were not in accordance with expectations or had been 
severed, and messages stating that Japan's armed forces had clashed with 
the armed forces of countries whose names were to be inserted or that 
Japan and countries whose names were to be inserted were entering a 
"full fledged general war" (ex. 1, pp. 186-188). The second message was 
from Hsinking to Tokyo, dated November 28, and contained the following: 

"In view of the situation, after conferring with the competent 
authorities, the following measures having to do with the treatment of 
British and American nationals in Manchukuo *in the event that war 
breaks out with England and the United States* are as outlined below. We 
are unanimously agreed on these matters. Should there be any questions 
regarding them, please wire me at once. 

"I. Policy. *On the outbreak of war with England and the United States*, 
after you have at the appropriate time gathered all these nationals 
together, they are to be returned each to his own homeland at as early a 
date as possible. However, until this return can be arranged, they are 
to be interned in places of concentration in Manchukuo. 

"The control of such property as they might leave behind will be 
administered by the Manchukuo Government (ex. 1, p. 198)."

On December 3 (Washington time) Secretary Hull held a press conference 
at which he repeated in large measure the statements he had made at his 
press conference on November 27 (Washington time), making it plain that 
at no time had the Japanese Government shown any disposition to modify 
its basic policies, which he described as at complete variance with 
those of the United States (tr. 1163). [1] That afternoon the Secretary 
had a telephone conversation with Admiral Stark at 4:45 o'clock (tr. 
1167). 

That day, and again the next day, the State Department received 
telegrams from the American Minister at Bangkok expressing the hope of 
the Thai Government- 

"that the American and British Governments will issue public statements 
to the effect that Japan by invading Thailand would incur the enmity and 
armed resistance of those two countries in addition to Thailand (ex. 
169, item 30)."

Other than Ambassador Nomura's report on his and Ambassador Kurusu's 
conference with Under Secretary Welles on December 3, and Foreign 
Minister Togo's reply to Ambassador Nomura's suggestion regarding a 
"leaders conference", both of which have been mentioned above, there is 
no evidence before the Committee of other 

[1] Cf. Washington Post, December 4, 1941.

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         419

intercepted Japanese messages bearing on Japanese-American relations 
generally that were translated and available in Washington on December 3 
(Washington time). 

The next morning, Thursday, December 4 (Washington time), six majority 
and minority leaders of the Senate and House met with President 
Roosevelt for 2 hours and thoroughly canvassed the Far Eastern situation 
"in connection with the defense of our own territories and vital 
interests in the Far East", and were reported to have left the White 
House "with the impression that the situation is critical, but will not 
necessarily come to a show-down with the presentation of Japan's reply" 
to the President's request for an accounting for the continued Japanese 
troop movements into southern French Indochina (Washington Post, 
December 5, 1941). That afternoon at 2:15 o'clock the President 
conferred for an hour with Secretary Knox (ex. 58). As he left the 
meeting Secretary Knox told reporters that, among other things, he knew 
definitely that there would be an investigation of the publication that 
day by the Chicago Tribune, practically in full, of a copy of United 
States plans for fighting a global war if it should eventuate, "the most 
highly secret paper in the possession of the Government" (tr. 14,411; 
Washington Post, December 5, 1941). At 3:30 o'clock, President Roosevelt 
conferred at the White House with Secretary Hull (ex. 58). That evening, 
according to a message dated December 6 (Washington time) from 
Ambassador Nomura to Foreign Minister Togo- 

"those engaged in Plan "A" dined with the President and advised him 
against a Japanese-American war and urged him to do the 'introducing' at 
once between Japan and China. However, the President did not make known 
what he had in mind. According to these men, this attitude of the 
President is his usual attitude (ex. 1, p. 247)."

In explanation of this information, Ambassador Nomura told the Foreign 
Minister that- 

"In addition to carrying on frontal negotiations with the President and 
Hull we also worked directly and indirectly through Cabinet members 
having close relations with the President and through individuals 
equally influential (because of its delicate bearing upon the State 
Department, please keep this point strictly secret) (ex. 1, p. 247)."

That day, Thursday, December 4, there were translated and available in 
Washington the first intercepted Japanese messages from Tokyo directing 
the destruction of code machines and machine codes by the Japanese 
Embassy in Washington. As already noted, there had been translated and 
available in Washington on December 1 (Washington time) a message sent 
from Tokyo on December 1 (Japan time) which informed the Japanese 
Embassy in Washington that the Japanese diplomatic offices in London, 
Hongkong, Singapore, and Manila had been instructed to abandon the use 
of code machines and to "dispose of them." This message had specifically 
stated, however, that regardless of other instructions, "the U. S. 
(Office) retains the machines and the machine codes" (ex. 1, p. 209). 
However, on December 2 (Japan time), in one of the intercepted messages 
translated and available in Washington on December 4 (Washington time), 
the Japanese Foreign Office had instructed the Japanese Embassy in 
Washington to destroy one code machine unit completely, as well as to 
burn all telegraphic codes except "those now used with the machine," and 
the various other codes. The Embassy was also instructed 

420             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

to dispose of "all files of messages coming and going and all other 
secret documents" at the time and in the manner "you deem most proper" 
(ex. 1, p. 215). This message was followed by a second message on 
December 4 (Japan time) which gave more detailed instructions concerning 
the burning of certain codes recently brought to Washington by a 
Japanese official from the Japanese Embassy in Mexico City, and directed 
that a certain code keying be kept in Ambassador Nomura's custody "until 
the last moment" (ex. 1, p. 231). 

Admiral Beardall, the Naval Aide to the President, testified that about 
the 4th or 5th of December, in connection with the delivery of "Magic" 
to the President, he called the President's particular attention to a 
message about the burning of codes. He testified that to the best of his 
recollection the gist of his conversation with the President was as 
follows: 

"I said, "Mr. President, this is a very significant dispatch," which he 
read very carefully, and he said "Well, when do you think it will 
happen?" I said, "Most any time" (tr. 14035-14036)."

He testified that when the President said, "When do you think it sill 
happen," he understood the President to mean, "When is war going to 
break out, when are we going to be attacked, or something" (tr. 14037). 

A third intercepted message translated and available in Washington on 
December 4 (Washington time) was from Ambassador Nomura to the Japanese 
Foreign Office, in which the Ambassador said: 

"If we continue to increase our forces in French Indo-China, it I8 
expected that the United States will close up our Consulates, therefore 
consideration should be given to steps to be taken in connection with 
the evacuation of the Consuls (ex. 1, p. 227)."

Also that day there was translated and available in Washington Foreign 
Minister Togo's reply, dated December 3 (Japan time), to Ambassador 
Nomura's report of his and Ambassador Kurusu's conference with Secretary 
Hull on December 1 (Washington time). In it, the Foreign Minister put 
forward arguments for the Ambassadors' use in their forthcoming meeting 
with Secretary Hull. The Foreign Minister claimed that the United States 
was using the recent statements of Japanese officials and the Japanese 
troop movements in the South "as an excuse to doubt our sincerity in 
wanting to bring about a successful settlement in the Japanese-U. S. 
Negotiations," and complained that Britain, the United States and others 
had been making military preparations against Japan "at an increasing 
tempo" and had been acting in a "more and more antagonistic manner of 
late. "We are insisting", the Foreign Minister said, "that all aid to 
Chiang cease as soon as Japanese-Chinese negotiations, at the 
instigation of the United States are launched" (ex. 1, pp. 225-226). 

On December 5 (Japan time) Ambassador Grew sent a rush telegram to 
Secretary Hull in which he stated: 

"You will no doubt be aware that the American proposal is being 
represented here to the press and to the public as a mere restatement of 
"fanciful principles which ignore the realities of the situation", and 
that no intimation whatever has been given out that the proposal, if 
implemented would provide Japan by peaceful and orderly processes with 
that security-political as well as economic-which she affects to seek by 
exercise of force. The response of most Japanese to whom we have said 
that the American proposal, far from being a formulation of fanciful 
principles designed to preserve the old order of things, is a well-
balanced, constructive, practical and forward-looking plan for creating 
order out of the disorders of the past, has been to express strong 
disappointment that the private individual 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         421

is not in a position to form any intelligent opinion with regard to a 
matter of such supreme importance, while some have said that if the 
American proposal is actually such as we have described it to be, an 
attitude of intransigence on the putt of the Japanese would be viewed 
with regret by the masses. 

"It is impossible to forecast precisely what effect publication of our 
proposal would have. Undoubtedly reaction to certain phases of the 
proposal, notably complete evacuation of China. Would be strong and 
indeed might be so violent as to eliminate the last possibility of an 
agreement. However, there would seem to be even greater risks of the 
elimination of that possibility if the points at issue continue in Japan 
to be befogged by ignorance and misrepresentation. I feel sure that you 
will have considered the wisdom of publishing the proposal as soon as 
possible after consultation with the Japanese Government, but even 
without the latter's assent if that should not be forthcoming (tr. 1821-
1823)."

[**THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT CLAIMS ITS TROOP MOVEMENTS IN FRENCH INDOCHINA ARE FOR THE PURPOSE OF DEFENSE AGAINST AN ATTACK BY THE CHINESE**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(December 5, 1941)**

In the meantime, on December 3 (Japan time), Foreign Minister Togo had 
sent Ambassador Nomura his message No. 875 containing the Japanese 
Government's formal reply to President Roosevelt's inquiry regarding the 
movement of additional Japanese troops into southern French Indochina 
(ex. 1, p. 224). This reply took the position that the Japanese 
reinforcements were a precautionary measure against Chinese troops in 
bordering Chinese territory. Ambassador Nomura had regarded the reply as 
unsatisfactory, and had at once cabled the Foreign Minister: 

"I received your reply immediately. I presume, of course, that this 
reply was a result of consultations and profound consideration. The 
United States Government is attaching a great deal of importance on this 
reply. Especially since the President issued his statement yesterday, it 
is being rumored among the journalists that this reply is to be the key 
deciding whether there will be war or peace between Japan and the United 
States. There is no saying but what the United States Government will 
take a bold step depending upon how our reply is made. If it is really 
the intention of our government to arrive at a settlement, the 
explanation you give, I am afraid, would neither satisfy them nor 
prevent them taking the bold step referred to-even if your reply is made 
for the mere purpose of keeping the negotiations going. Therefore, in 
view of what has been elucidated in our proposal which I submitted to 
the President on November 10th, I would like to get a reply which gives 
a clearer impression of our peaceful intentions. Will you, therefore, 
reconsider this question with this in mind and wire me at once (ex. 1, 
pp. 227-228)."

The Foreign Minister's reply to Ambassador Nomura had come back the next 
day: 

"What you say in your telegram is, of course, true, but at present it 
would be a very delicate matter to give any more explanations than set 
forth in my #875. I would advise against it because unfortunate results 
might follow, so please reply in accordance with my aforementioned 
message (ex. 1, p. 232)."

Accordingly, on December 5 (Washington time), the Japanese Ambassadors 
called on Secretary Hull and presented their Government's reply to 
President Roosevelt's inquiry'(ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 

[1] It is significant that press reports which reached Washington early 
in the morning of December 5 (Washington time), stated that in Tokyo 
that day the authoritative Japanese news agency had announced that 
"Japan cannot accept" the provisions of the United States' note of 
November 26. Domei was reported to have said: "Such a document cannot 
serve as a basic datum in Japanese-American negotiations henceforth". 
These statements, together with Japanese comment critical of Secretary 
Hull's remarks at his press conference on December 3 (Washington time), 
were carried in morning newspapers in Washington on December 5 under 
such headlines as "JAPAN 'CAN'T ACCEPT' TERMS" and "JAPAN EXPECTED TO 
REJECT TERMS" (Washington Post December 5, 1941). Secretary Hull 
conferred for a short time with President Roosevelt before his meeting 
with the Japanese Ambassadors (Washington Post, December 6, 1941).

422             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

781-783). The Japanese reply as handed to the Secretary follows in full: 

Reference is made 1;e your inquiry about the intention of the Japanese 
Government with regard to the reported movements of Japanese troops in 
French Indochina. Under instructions from Tokyo I wish to inform you as 
follows: 

As Chinese troops have recently shown frequent signs of movements along 
the northern frontier of French Indo-China bordering on China, Japanese 
troops, with the object of mainly taking precautionary measures, have 
been reinforced to a certain extent in the northern part of French 
Indochina. As a natural sequence of this step, certain movements have 
been taken on the part of the Japanese Government that may transgress 
the stipulations of the Protocol of Joint Defense between Japan std 
France (vol. II, p. 784). 

After reading the reply, Secretary Hull said: 

that he understood that Japan had been putting forces into northern 
Indochina for the purpose of attacking China from there. He said that he 
had never heard before that Japan's troop movements into northern 
Indochina were for the purpose of defense against Chinese attack. The 
Secretary added that it was the first time that he knew that Japan was 
on the defensive in Indochina (vol. II, p. 781). 

Ambassador Nomura then repeated to the Secretary the gist of the Foreign 
Minister's message of December 3 (Japan time) mentioned above, claiming 
that the Japanese were alarmed over increasing naval and military 
preparation of the "ABCD" powers in the southwest Pacific, and asserting 
that the Japanese Government was "very anxious" to reach an agreement 
with this Government and that the United States ought to be willing to 
agree to discontinue aid to China as soon as conversations between China 
and Japan were initiated. The remainder of the conversation consisted 
largely of a repetition of matters expressed many times before by both 
the Japanese. And the Secretary (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 781-783). 

That morning, December 5 (Washington time), President Roosevelt had 
received a memorandum from Under Secretary Welles passing on to him a 
suggestion from the Australian Prime Minister that if Sir. Wendell 
Willkie should visit Australia with the "imprimateur" of the President, 
his visit would be most welcome to the Australian Government. The 
President had immediately dictated a letter to Mr. Willkie regarding 
this, in which he said: 

"There is always the Japanese matter to consider. The situation is 
definitely serious and there might be an armed clash at any moment if 
the Japanese continued their forward progress against the Philippines, 
Dutch Indies or Malaya or Burma. Perhaps the next four or five days will 
decide the matter (ex. 111). "

Following his conference with the Japanese Ambassadors, Secretary Hull 
had lunch at 1 o'clock at the White House with President Roosevelt, 
after which both the President and the Secretary attended a full Cabinet 
meeting at 2 o'clock (ex. 58). 

That day the American Minister at Bangkok reported to the State 
Department that he had been informed by the Thai Minister for Foreign 
Affairs that the Japanese Ambassador in Thailand had told the Minister 
that the Japanese forces in Indochina "definitely would not be used to 
invade Thailand and that they were concentrated for use against the 
Burma Road" (ex. 169, item 31). Also that day, Lord Halifax, the British 
Ambassador, called on Secretary Hull, who recorded that the Ambassador- 

"said he had a message from Eden, head of the British Foreign Office, 
setting forth the British view that the time has now come for immediate 
cooperation with the Dutch East Indies by mutual understanding. This of 
course relates to the matter of defense against Japan. I expressed my 
appreciation (tr. 14,515)."

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            423

The evening of December 5 (Washington time) the State Department sent a 
telegram to the American Embassy in Tokyo via Peiping by naval radio for 
the information of the American Embassy in Chungking and the American 
consul at Hong Kong containing instructions applicable to all offices in 
Japan Japanese-occupied areas in China, Hong Kong Indochina, and 
Thailand. Those instructions were- 

"intended to enable officers, in the event of sudden emergency and in 
case communications with the Department are delayed or severed, to take 
appropriate action concerning Government property, alien employees, 
archives, leases, the evacuation of the American members of the staff, 
et cetera (tr. 1967-A)."

The telegram included the following paragraph concerning the destruction 
of codes: 

"It is of the utmost importance that all confidential files, seals, 
codes, ciphers, true readings, protectograph dies, et cetera, should be 
destroyed. Fee stamps should be destroyed by burning in the presence of 
at least two competent witnesses whose affidavits should be obtained 
(tr. 1967-D)."

It ended as follows: 

"The sending of this instruction is in the nature of a precautionary 
measure and the authority granted in the foregoing paragraphs is 
intended to enable the officers concerned to deal with a sudden 
emergency. The concerned officers should quietly formulate plans to deal 
with an emergency if and when it arises. It is highly desirable that 
discussion be kept to a minimum and that publicity be avoided (tr. 1967-
E)."

Previously, on November 27 (Washington time), the day after the delivery 
of the United States reply, the State Department had sent a telegram to 
Ambassador Grew which strongly suggested the probability that the 
Japanese-American conversations might "lapse" and result "in withdrawal 
of our diplomatic and consular representation from Japan," and that he 
should quietly prepare for that eventuality (ex. 18). Also, on November 
19 (Washington time), the State Department had sent a telegram to the 
American Embassy in Tokyo via Shanghai by naval radio for the 
information of the American Embassies at Chungking, Peiping, and the 
American consul at Hong Kong, in which it was stated that the Department 
desired that- 

"the American diplomatic and consular officers concerned call to the 
attention of American citizens in the Japanese Empire, Japanese-occupied 
areas of China, Hong Kong, Macao, and French Indochina the advice 
previously given in regard to withdrawal and in so doing emphasize that 
the shipping problem in the Pacific is very difficult and that because 
of urgent demands elsewhere there is no assurance that it will be 
possible to retain in the Pacific even the the [sic] present facilities 
(tr. 4508 4509)." 

The telegram of November 19 (Washington time) was the last of three 
major warnings sent by the State Department during 1940 and 1941 
advising American nationals to leave the Orient, the other major 
warnings have been sent on October 6, 1940, and February 11, 1941 (tr. 
4502-4508). 

On December 5 (Washington time), there was translated and available in 
Washington a message sent 2 days earlier by Ambassador Nomura to Foreign 
Minister Togo in which the Ambassador said: 

"Judging from all indications, we feel that some joint military action 
between Great Britain and the United States, with or without a 
declaration of war, is a definite certainty in the event of an 
occupation of Thailand (ex. 1, p. 227).

At the Japanese Embassy in Washington that day, Councilor Iguchi cabled 
the Japanese Foreign Office, in response to its instruc- 

424             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

tions to destroy one code machine unit and to burn all telegraphic codes 
except those used with the machine: 

"We have completed destruction of codes, but since the U. S.-Japanese 
negotiations are still continuing I request your approval of our desire 
to delay for a while yet the destruction of the one code machine (ex. 1, 
p. 236)."

The Foreign Office promptly replied that its instructions regarding code 
machines were: 

"of the two sets of "B" code machines with which your office is 
equipped, you are to burn one set and *for the time being* to continue 
the use of the other (ex. 1, p. 237)."

Both of these intercepted Japanese messages were translated and 
available in Washington the next day. 

[**THE LAST HOURS**](https://www.ibiblio.org/pha/pha/congress/app-d.html)

**(December 6-8, 1941)**

The next day was Saturday, December 6 (Washington time). In the 
southwest Pacific, the Japanese naval and military forces whose 
movements in and toward French Indochina had commenced in earnest soon 
after the Imperial Conference in Tokyo on November 5 (Japan time) and 
had been observed both by British and American forces based in Malaya 
and in the Philippines, had begun their final dispositions. It is now 
known that at the same time, in the mid-Pacific some 6,000 miles away, 
the Japanese naval force that had left its rendezvous in northern Japan 
on November 25 (Washington time)-still undiscovered and now almost 
within striking distance of the Hawaiian Islands-was steaming at high 
speed toward its target, the United States Pacific Fleet in Pearl 
Harbor. 

While reports of the final Japanese movements in the southwest Pacific 
began to reach Washington before noon on December 6 (Washington time), 
the record before the Committee conclusively shows that no one in the 
United States Government or in its military and naval forces, either in 
Washington or in the field, knew of the approach of the Japanese naval 
striking force to the Hawaiian Islands. 

That morning, at 10:40 o'clock, the State Department received the 
following telegram from Ambassador Winant in London, marked "Triple 
priority and most urgent" and "Personal and secret to the Secretary and 
the President": 

"British Admiralty reports that at 3 a. m. London time this morning two 
parties seen off Cambodia Point, sailing slowly westward toward Kra 14 
hours distant in time. First party 25 transports, 6 cruisers, 10 
destroyers. Second party 10 transports, 2 cruisers, 10 destroyers (ex. 
21)."

The State Department file copy of this message bears the stamp "Sent to 
the President," but does not indicate the hour when that action was 
taken. The same information had been received in Washington by the Navy 
Department earlier that morning in a message sent by Admiral Hart from 
Manila at 7:55 a. m. (Washington time) to Admiral Stark (tr. 4344, ex. 
66). The information so received by the Navy Department was communicated 
to the State Department in a memorandum of December 6 signed by Admiral 
Schuirmann (ex. 66). Secretary Hull's engagement books for that day show 
that he had an appointment with Admiral Schuirmann at 1:50 p. m. (Tr. 
1168), at which time the memorandum was presumably handed to the 
Secretary by Admiral Schuirmann. Similar information was received

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         425

in the State Department from the War-Department early the next morning 
(tr. 14,290). The record of outside telephone calls through the White 
House switchboard on December 6 shows that Secretary Hull was again 
called by Secretary Stimson at 12:58 p. m. and by Admiral Stark at 1:09 
p. m. (Ex. 58; tr. 1168). At 3:05 p. m. that afternoon the State 
Department received a second message from Ambassador Winant, marked 
"Triple priority and most urgent" and "Personal and secret for the 
Secretary," containing additional information concerning the 
Ambassador's earlier message regarding the Japanese naval movement. The 
second message follows in full: 

"Again from Cadogan. Admiralty conference on information just forwarded, 
Cadogan attending. They were uncertain as to whether destination of 
parties is Kra or Bangkok. Latter would not be reached before Monday. 

"Note a discrepancy in time reported by me and time reported in our 
naval despatch. Latter stating 3 a. m. Greenwich time, by despatch as 
given me 3 a. m. London time. Believe former correct. 

"British feel pressed for time in relation to guaranteeing support 
Thailand fearing Japan might force them to invite invasion on pretext 
protection before British have opportunity to guarantee support but 
wanting to carry out President's wishes in message transmitted by Welles 
to Halifax. 

"Leaving to spend evening with Eden in order to go over with him your 
number 5682, December 5 although I had previously pressed on him each of 
the points you outlined prior to reception your message with the 
exception of paragraph seven which I agree is not clear and which I will 
clear up with him this evening. I want you to know that I had nothing to 
do with the insertion of the reference to the I. L. O. 

"I am having lunch with the Prime Minister tomorrow at his usual place 
in the country and will be constantly in contact with the Embassy over 
private wires in case you wish to communicate with me [1] (ex. 21). "

At 5:15 o'clock that afternoon Secretary Hull again telephoned Admiral 
Stark (tr. 1168). 

That morning at 11 o'clock the State Department received the following 
telegram from Ambassador Gauss in Chungking: 

"The Chief of the Information Department of the Foreign Office informed 
a member of my staff yesterday that "the British wanted to move into 
Thailand but hesitated to do so in the absence of a clear indication of 
the American attitude." He said that this report came from a very 
reliable source in the United States. I attach no significance to the 
report except as indicative of an interesting and somewhat prevalent 
tendency to play up the situation (ex. 169, item 32)."

At 6 p. m. that day the Department sent a telegram to the American 
Minister at Bangkok informing him that he might assure the Thai 
authorities that the extension of credit to Thailand for its current 
needs was fully agreed to in principle and that the Department expected 
no delay in working out the details with the appropriate lending 
agencies of the United States Government (ex. 169, item 33). 

In the meantime, both President Roosevelt and Secretary Hull had given 
renewed attention to the proposal to send a message to Emperor Hirohito. 
It will be recalled that a draft of such a message had been prepared the 
preceding Saturday and probably discussed the next 

[1] Under Secretary Welles was questioned at length by Senator Ferguson 
regarding the "message transmitted by Welles to Halifax" referred to in 
Ambassador Winant's telegram quoted above (tr. 1300-1316; 1337-1340). At 
Senator Ferguson's request, Mr. Welles undertook to make a special 
search for the message (tr. 1316), after which he reported to the 
Committee that it was his understanding that the message in question was 
the message from President Roosevelt which he communicated to the 
Japanese Ambassadors on December 2 (Washington time) and a copy of which 
he sent to the British Ambassador the same day (tr. 1338). The State 
Department advised Committee counsel that no written record of the 
message referred to in Ambassador Winant's telegram could be found in 
its files, and that accordingly it must be assumed the message was oral 
(tr. 1300). See in this connection the discussion supra of Under 
Secretary Welles reported conference with Lord Halifax on December 1 
(Washington time). 

Telegram number 5682 referred to in Ambassador Winant's telegram appears 
in the record before this Committee as exhibit No. 166. It does not deal 
with the situation in the Far East in any way. 

426             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Monday by the Secretary with the President upon his return from Warm 
Springs. The next day, Tuesday (December 2), Secretary Stimson had 
recorded in his notes: 

"The President is still deliberating the possibility of a message to the 
Emperor, although all the rest of us are rather against it, but in 
addition to that he is quite settled, I think, that he will make a 
message to the Congress and will perhaps back that up with a speech to 
the country (tr. 14,427)."

Secretary Hull testified that he was in consultation with President 
Roosevelt at all stages of the drafting of the President's message to 
the Emperor (tr. 14,297). The record contains a note in President 
Roosevelt's handwriting, undated but bearing a stamp showing that it was 
received in Secretary Hull's office on December 6, which reads: 

"DEAR CORDELL: Shoot this to Grew-I think can go in grey code-saves 
time-I don't mind if it gets picked up. 

"F. D. R. (ex. 20)."

The message to Emperor Hirohito attached to the President's memorandum 
was returned to the President attached to a "Memorandum for the 
President," also dated December 6 and initialled by Secretary Hull, as 
follows: 

"There is attached your message to the Emperor of Japan with page three 
of the message amended to take care of the point with regard to which I 
spoke to you on the telephone. 

"If you approve the draft as it now stands, we shall see that it gets 
off to Grew at once (ex. 20)."

Beneath Secretary Hull's initials appears the following in President 
Roosevelt's handwriting: 

"C. H. O K-send the amended p. 3 to the British Ambassador & send a copy 
to me. F. D. R. (ex. 20)."

The amended page 3 bears the President's handwritten "O. K.," followed 
by his initials (ex. 20). There is no explanation in the record before 
the Committee of the reason for the President's instruction to send a 
copy of the amended page three to the British Ambassador. 

The first three and last paragraphs of the message as thus finally 
revised were substantially the same as those of the draft message 
attached to Secretary Hull's memorandum of November 29 to the President. 
The remainder of the message sent-comprising the main part-consisted of 
material that is not found in any of the drafts in evidence before the 
Committee. Secretary Hull testified that the message actually sent to 
the Emperor- 

"was prepared in final form on December 6, and included contributions 
made in the White House as well as material contained in the drafts 
prepared in the State Department during the preceding weeks (tr. 
14,264)."

At 8 o'clock that evening (December 6), the State Department dispatched 
to Ambassador Grew a brief telegram stating that an important telegram 
to him was being encoded and that it contained the text of a message 
from President Roosevelt to Emperor Hirohito, to be communicated by 
Ambassador Grew to the Emperor at the "earliest possible moment" (ex. 
20). Both messages were initialled for Secretary Hull by Dr. Hornbeck 
(ex. 20), which may indicate that after approving the message in final 
form the Secretary had left the Department for the day. The telegram 
containing President Roosevelt's 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         427

message to Emperor Hirohito was dispatched from the State Department at 
9 o'clock that evening (ex. 20). The message follows in full: 

"Almost a century ago the President of the United States addressed to 
the Emperor of Japan a message extending an offer of friendship of the 
people of the United States to the people of Japan. That offer was 
accepted, and in the long period of unbroken peace and friendship which 
has followed, our respective nations, through the virtues of their 
peoples and the wisdom of their rulers have prospered and have 
substantially helped humanity. 

"Only in situations of extraordinary importance to our two countries 
need I address to Your Majesty messages on matters of state. I feel I 
should now so address you because of the deep and far-reaching emergency 
which appears to be in formation. 

"Developments are occurring in the Pacific area which threaten to 
deprive each of our nations and all humanity of the beneficial influence 
of the long peace between our two countries. Those developments contain 
tragic possibilities. 

"The people of the United States, believing in peace and in the right of 
nations to live and let live, have eagerly watched the conversations 
between our two Governments during these past months. We have hoped for 
a termination of the present conflict between Japan and China. Vs e have 
hoped that a peace of the Pacific could be consummated in such a way 
that nationalities of many diverse peoples could exist side by side 
without fear of invasion that unbearable burdens of armaments could be 
lifted for them all; and that all peoples would resume commerce without 
discrimination against or in favor of any nation. 

"I am certain that it will be clear to Your Majesty, as it is to me, 
that in seeking these great objectives both Japan and the United States 
should agree to eliminate any form of military threat. This seemed 
essential to the attainment of the high objectives. 

"!More than a year ago Your Majesty's Government concluded an agreement 
v I h the Vichy- Government by which five or six thousand Japanese 
troops were permitted to enter into Northern French Indo-China for the 
protection of Japanese troops which were operating against China further 
north. And this Spring and Summer the Vichy Government permitted further 
Japanese military forces to enter into Southern French Indo-China for 
the common defense of French Indo-China. I think I am correct in saving 
that no attack has been made upon Indo-China, nor that any has been 
contemplated. 

"During the past few weeks it has become clear to the world that 
Japanese military, naval, and air forces have been sent to Southern 
Indo-China in such large numbers as to create a reasonable doubt on the 
part of other nations that this continuing concentration in Indo-China 
is not defensive in its character. 

"Because these continuing concentrations in Indo-China have reached such 
large proportions and because they extend now to the southeast and the 
southwest corners of that Peninsula, it is only reasonable that the 
people of the Philippines, of the hundreds of Islands of the East 
Indies, of Malaya and of Thailand itself are asking themselves whether 
these forces of Japan are preparing or intending to make attack in one 
or more of these many directions. 

"I am sure that Your Majesty will understand that the fear of all these 
peoples is a legitimate fear inasmuch as it involves their peace and 
their national existence. I am sure that Your Majesty will understand 
why the people of the United States in such large numbers look askance 
at the establishment of military, naval, and air bases manned and 
equipped so greatly as to constitute armed forces capable of measures of 
offense. 

"It is clear that a continuance of such a situation is unthinkable. 

"None of the peoples whom I have spoken of above can sit either 
indefinitely or permanently on a keg of dynamite. 

"There is absolutely no thought on the part of the United States of 
invading Indo-China if every Japanese soldier or sailor were to be 
withdrawn therefrom. 

"I think that we can obtain the same assurance from the Governments of 
the East Indies, the Governments of Malaya and the Government of 
Thailand. I would even undertake to ask for the same assurance on the 
part of the Government of China. Thus a withdrawal of the Japanese 
forces from Indo-China would result in the assurance of peace throughout 
the whole of the South Pacific area. 

"I address myself to Your Majesty at this moment in the fervent hope 
that Your Majesty may, as I am doing, give thought in this definite 
emergency to ways of dispelling the dark clouds. I am confident that 
both of us, for the sake of the peoples not only of our own great 
countries but for the sake of humanity in neighboring territories, have 
a sacred duty to restore traditional amity and prevent further death and 
destruction in the world (vol. II, pp. 784-786)."

428             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Also at 9 o'clock that evening a telegram from Secretary Hull to 
Ambassador Gauss at Chungking was dispatched by the State Department, 
instructing the Ambassador to communicate to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-
shek a copy of President Roosevelt's message to Emperor Hirohito, for 
the Generalissimo's confidential information. This telegram was also 
initialled for the Secretary by Dr. Hornbeck. After quoting the 
President's message in full, the telegram concluded: 

"In communicating copy of this message to Chiang Kai-shek, please state 
orally as from the President that the quoted message has already been 
sent by the President to the Emperor; that this message, as the 
situation now stands, would seem to represent very nearly the last 
diplomatic move that this Government can make toward causing Japan to 
desist from its present course; that if the slender chance of acceptance 
by Japan should materialize, a very effective measure would have been 
taken toward safeguarding the Burma Road; and that it is very much hoped 
that Chiang Kai-shek will not make or allow to be spread in Chinese 
Government circles adverse comment (tr. 14,517)."

The final comment may well have been intended to forestall comment such 
as the Generalissimo had made at the time the modus vivendi was under 
consideration. 

Ambassador Grew testified that he first learned of the President's 
message the evening of December 7 (Japan time) while listening to a 
radio broadcast from San Francisco (tr. 1501-1503; ex. 30, pp. 486-487). 
He immediately instructed Mr. Dooman, the Embassy Counselor, to stand 
by, and not long thereafter the first, short telegram from Secretary 
Hull was received. Although it showed on its face it had been received 
in Tokyo at 12 noon (Japan time), an hour after its dispatch from 
Washington at 11 a. m. (Japan time), the Secretary's second telegram 
containing President Roosevelt's message to the Emperor was not 
delivered at the Embassy until 10:30 p. m. "In other words," Ambassador 
Grew testified, "the telegram appears to have been delivered to the 
Japanese post office, which handled telegrams, 1 hour after its receipt, 
and they held it up throughout that day, from 12 noon until-10:30 p. m." 
(Japan time) (tr. 1501), or 8:30 a. m. December 7 (Washington time). 
Ambassador Grew saw Foreign Minister Togo at about a quarter past 12 
that night. He read President Roosevelt's message aloud to the Foreign 
Minister, handed him a copy, and then requested an audience with the 
Emperor to present the President's message personally. Not until after 
Ambassador Grew had found it necessary to repeat his request did the 
Foreign Minister agree to present the matter to the Throne, (tr. 
14,516). 

To return to events in Washington, President Roosevelt's appointments 
for Saturday, December 6, as shown by his engagement book were two, both 
at the White House and both in the morning. The first was at 10 o'clock 
with Justice William O. Douglas, and the second was at 11:15 o'clock 
with Budget Director Harold O. Smith (ex. 58). The President had no 
scheduled appointments that afternoon. That evening the President and 
Mrs. Roosevelt entertained at dinner at 8 o'clock at the White House 
(ex. 58). Apart from the evidence already mentioned of the President's 
activities that day in connection with his message to Emperor Hirohito, 
the only other evidence before the Committee affirmatively showing the 
President's activities before the White House dinner that evening is a 
statement contained in a letter dated May 22, 1946, from an official of 
the Australian Legation in Washington in answer to certain inquiries 
made by the Committee through the State Department (tr. 14,631-14,632). 
Referring to a telegram from the Australian Minister for 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            425

External Affairs in Canberra to the British Secretary of State for 
Dominion Affairs of the United Kingdom in London, a paraphrase of which 
is quoted below, that letter states: 

"The telegram contains the substance of a message which the Australian 
Minister for External Affairs had received from the Australian Minister- 
at Washington. This message was dispatched from Washington at 9:30 p. m. 
On December 6th, 1941. *The information contained therein regarding the 
procedure to be followed by the President had come orally from the 
President late in the afternoon of December 6th.*" (Tr. 14,631). 

The paraphrase of the Australian Minister for External Affairs' telegram 
is as follows: 

"Subject to conditions that President gives prior approval to text of 
warning as drafted and also gives signal for actual delivery of warning, 
we concur in draft as a joint communication from all His Majesty's 
Governments. I point out that message from Australian Minister at 
Washington just received notes that 

"1. President has decided to send message to Emperor. 

"2. President's subsequent procedure is that if no answer is received by 
him from the Emperor by Monday evening 

"(a) he will issue his warning on Tuesday afternoon or evening, 

"(b) warning or equivalent by British or others will not follow until 
Wednesday morning, i. e., after his own warning has been delivered 
repeatedly to Tokyo and Washington (tr. 13, 741-13, 742)."

It would seem clear that the "draft" referred to in the telegram quoted 
above was the document, a copy of which was obtained by the Committee 
from the files of President Roosevelt, attached to an unsigned 
memorandum dated December 7, 1941, on stationery bearing the official 
seal of the British Government (tr. 13,738). The memorandum was as 
follows: 

"The Prime Minister would be very glad of any comments which the 
President may have on the attached draft of a declaration to the 
Japanese Government. 

"The Dominion Governments have yet to give their views on this text. 
They are being consulted urgently. 

"The Netherlands government have been given a copy of the draft (tr. 
13,738)"

The draft declaration to the Japanese Government which was attached to 
this memorandum was as follows: 

"YOUR EXCELLENCY: 

"I have the honour to inform Your Excellency that I have been instructed 
to make the following communication to the Imperial Japanese Government 
on behalf of His Majesty's Governments in the United Kingdom, Canada, 
the Commonwealth of Australia, New Zealand, and the Union of South 
Africa. 

"His Majesty's Governments in the United Kingdom, Canada, Commonwealth 
of Australia, New Zealand, Union of South Africa have followed closely 
in consultation with the United States Government the negotiations in 
which the latter have been engaged with the Japanese Government with a 
view to relieving the present tension in the Far East. His Majesty's 
Governments viewed with the same concern as the United States Government 
the rapidly growing concentration of Japanese forces in Indo-China which 
prompted the enquiry by the United States Government to the Japanese 
Government on December 2nd. They have found Japanese reply to that 
enquiry extremely disquieting. However valid the explanations in regard 
to North Indo-China as to which they expressly reserve their views the 
reply entirely fails to explain the fact that the bulk of Japanese 
forces are stationed in South Indo-China and are being constantly and 
heavily augmented. 

"There is no threat from any quarter against Indo-China and this 
concentration in South Indo-China is only explicable on the assumption 
that the Japanese Government are preparing for some further aggressive 
move directed against the Netherlands East Indies, Malaya, or Thailand. 

"Relations between the Governments of the British Commonwealth and the 
Netherlands Government are too well known for the Japanese Government to 

430             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

be under any illusion as to their reaction to any attack on territories 
of the Netherlands. In the interest of peace His Majesty's Governments 
feel it incumbent upon them, however, to remove any uncertainty which 
may exist as regards their attitude in the event of attack on Thailand. 

"His Majesty's Governments have no designs against Thailand. On the 
contrary, preservation of full independence and sovereignty of Thailand 
is an important British interest. Any attempt by Japan to impair that 
independence or sovereignty would affect the security of Burma and Malay 
and His Majesty's Governments could not be indifferent to it. They feel 
bound therefore to warn the Japanese Government in the most solemn 
manner that if Japan attempts to establish her influence in Thailand by 
force or threat of force she will do so at her own peril and His 
Majesty's Governments will at once take all appropriate measures. Should 
hostilities unfortunately result the responsibility will rest with Japan 
(tr. 13738-13740)."

It would seem clear that the foregoing draft is the draft warning to 
Japan "concurred in" by the Australian Minister for External Affairs in 
his telegram to the British Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs, 
which was dispatched from Canberra the evening of December 7 (tr. 
14,631-14,632). 

In connection with these documents, it will be recalled that the 
Marshall-Stark joint memorandum of November 27 to President Roosevelt 
had recommended that- 

"prior to the completion of the Philippine reinforcement, military 
counteraction be considered only if Japan attacks or directly threatens 
United States, British, or Dutch territory as above outlined; 

"*in case of a Japanese advance into Thailand, Japan be warned by the 
United States, the British, and the Dutch governments that advance 
beyond the lines indicated may lead to war*; prior to such warning no 
joint military opposition be undertaken; 

"*steps be taken at once to consummate agreements with the British and 
Dutch for the issuance of such warning (ex. 17).*"

It will be also recalled that on Sunday, November 30 (Washington time), 
the State Department had received through Ambassador Winant a message 
from Prime Minister Churchill to President Roosevelt in which the Prime 
Minister, while stating that he realized the President's "constitutional 
difficulties," begged the President to consider at such moment as the 
President should judge right "which may be very near," the President 
should not tell Japan "that any further Japanese aggression would compel 
you to place the gravest issues before Congress or words to that 
effect." The Prime Minister had said that this was the one important 
method that remained "unused in averting war between Japan and our two 
countries," and that Great Britain would "make a similar declaration or 
share in a joint declaration" (ex. 24). 

There is thus evidence before the Committee that by the late afternoon 
of December 6 the President had determined upon a procedure which 
contemplated that his message to Emperor Hirohito, as the first step 
(which he took despite the views of those of his advisors who felt that 
it would have little effect), would be followed, as recommended by 
General Marshall and Admiral Stark and previously discussed at length 
with his principal Cabinet advisors, and as urged by Prime Minister 
Churchill, by a warning to Japan by the United States Government, with 
similar warnings by the Governments of Great Britain and the 
Netherlands. The warning recommended by General Marshall and Admiral 
Stark was to be given "in case of a Japanese advance into Thailand," and 
by late Saturday afternoon the progress of the Japanese naval force 
around Cambodia Point had 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             431 

made such an advance an imminent probability. While both General 
Marshall (tr. 13809) and Admiral Stark (tr. 13760) testified that to the 
best of their recollection they were not consulted regarding the 
President's procedure outlined in the Australian message quoted above, 
that procedure followed the recommendation made in their joint 
memorandum of November 27 to the President so far as a warning to Japan 
was concerned. 

In this connection it should be noted that according to Secretary 
Stimson, President Roosevelt planned to give his warning to Japan in his 
proposed message to Congress. He said: 

"The final view was that an additional warning to Japan should be given 
(tr. 14482). 

*      *      *      *      *      *      * 

"The President was in fact during the early part of December engaged in 
preparing an address to Congress which would incorporate such a warning, 
and was also considering a special telegram to the Emperor. Before the 
address to the Congress was delivered, however, the Japanese struck on 
December 7th (tr. 14478).

"The proposal was to go to Congress in advance, and through the address 
to Congress to give the Japanese a final warning (tr. 14487)."

Both the State Department, with respect to its files, and Miss Tully as 
custodian of the President's files, were requested by the Committee to 
furnish it with all information and documents relating to the proposed 
British warning and the telegram from the Australian Minister for 
External Affairs mentioned above (tr. 14628-14629; 14632-14633). The 
State Department searched its files twice and after the second search 
advised the Committee that no material relevant to those documents had 
been found (tr. 14629). Miss Tully advised the Committee that a further 
search of President Roosevelt's files had not disclosed any additional 
documents or memoranda regarding the documents in question. Regarding 
the message from the Australian Minister at Washington to Canberra, Miss 
Tully reported that she believed that "he and the late President 
discussed the subject but, of course, no record was ever made of such 
conversations" (tr. 14634). 

The preceding day, perhaps at the meeting of his Cabinet, President 
Roosevelt had requested Secretaries Hull, Stimson, and Knox to compile 
for him the information available in their respective Departments 
concerning Japanese air, ground, and naval forces in French Indochina 
and adjacent areas. A memorandum dated December 5, 1941, based on Office 
of Naval Intelligence estimates, was transmitted by Secretary Knox to 
Secretary Hull with a covering, undated memorandum signed by the 
Secretary stating that the figures attached were those concerning which 
he had just talked with Secretary Hull on the telephone (ex. 175). A 
similar memorandum, dated December 6, and prepared by the Military 
Intelligence Division, was transmitted by Secretary Stimson to Secretary 
Hull on the same day with a covering letter in which Secretary Stimson 
specifically referred to the President's request of "yesterday" (ex. 
175). The information contained in the memoranda, together with 
information received in the State Department from American diplomatic 
and consular sources, was combined in the State Department in a 
"Memorandum for the President," dated December 6, as follows: 

432             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

"Japanese Forces and Recent Increase in Japanese Military Material and 
Equipment in Indochina

"According to information reported by our Consuls at Hanoi and Saigon, 
received by them from French military sources in Indochina and not 
confirmed it is estimated that there are at present in northern 
Indochina (Tongking) 25,000 Japanese troops and 80,000 in southern 
Indochina, making a total of 105,000, and that there are at the outside 
some 450 Japanese planes in Indochina. According to a statement made 
December 4 by the Governor General of Indochina to our Consul at Hanoi, 
there are approximately 70,000 Japanese troops in Indochina, a little 
less than 30,000 being in Tongking and the balance in the south. The 
estimate of 105,000 is considered to be approximately correct by the 
Military Intelligence Division of the War Department. 

"According to the Office of Naval Intelligence of the Navy Department, 
21 transports were sighted in Camranh Bay on December 2 by an air patrol 
from Manila, 12 submarines were sighted at sea northeast of Saigon 
proceeding south and nine of these submarines are now in Camranh Bay 
with other naval units including several destroyers. Our Consul at Hanoi 
reported on December 5 information from a reportedly reliable source 
that there were in Camranh Bay 30 transports carrying an estimated 
division of troops. Our Consul at Tsingtao reported on December 1 that 
for the preceding ten days an average of about three transports had left 
Tsingtao daily loaded with troops in summer uniforms. 

"An official of the French Foreign Office at Vichy stated to an officer 
of our Embassy on December 3 that the Japanese recently had been sending 
large amounts of military equipment and material into Indochina. 
According to our Consul at Hanoi Japanese military equipment recently 
landed in Indochina includes, as estimated by French military sources, 
3,400 trucks and tractors, 600 automobiles, 500 motorcycles, 260 tanks 
(categories unspecified), 300 cannon, 2,000 machine guns, 1,300 
submachine guns, 2,100 pack horses and a large number of bicycles. 

"The marked increase in Japanese troops in Indochina reportedly began 
November 21 with the arrival of 21 troop and supply ships at Saigon, the 
landing of 20,000 troops there, the transfer of 10,000 troops from 
northern Indochina southward and the subsequent landing of additional 
troops at both Saigon and Haiphong, those landed at the latter place 
proceeding southward by train. 

"At nearby Hainan Island there are estimated by the Military 
Intelligence Division of the War Department to be some 30,000 Japanese 
troops and an unknown number of planes. Pursuit planes as well as 
bombers can fly from Hainan Island to northern Indochina, either direct 
or via Waichow Island off Pakhoi, Kwantung Province of China (ex. 175)."

Secretary Hull testified that he was most invariably at home in the 
evening "working on Departmental matters," and that while it was 
possible he might be mistaken, it was his best recollection that he was 
"at home on the night of December 6, 1941" (tr. 14,315-14,317). The 
record before the Committee shows that at 8:45 o'clock that evening 
Secretary Hull had a telephone conversations with Secretary Knox, 
lasting not over 2 minutes (ex. 58; tr. 1168). While Secretary Hull's 
records indicate that he called Secretary Knox (tr. 1168), the records 
of the While House switchboard operators indicate that Secretary Knox 
called Secretary Hull that evening at 8:45 p. m., between two calls to 
Secretary Stimson made by Secretary Knox at 8:30 and 8:47 p. m. (Ex. 
58). It is not clear from the record [1] before the Com-

[1] Captain Kramer testified that before delivering copies of the first 
13 parts to the White House, to Secretary Knox, and to Admiral Theodore 
S. Wilkinson (then Director of Naval Intelligence), he telephoned the 
several persons to whom he customarily made deliveries of intercepted 
Japanese messages, and that he commenced these phone calls at about a 
quarter of 9 (tr. 10446-10450). He testified that he did not begin 
deliveries that evening until after 9 a. m., and that he did not reach 
Secretary Knox's apartment until after 9:15 p. m. (tr. 10451). He 
further testified that Secretary Knox read the lengthy 13 parts before 
making any telephone calls (tr. 14454). On the basis of this testimony, 
Secretary Knox s phone calls could not have been made before 9:30 p. m., 
whereas the actual records made at the time show that the first of 
Secretary Knox's three calls to Secretary Stimson and Secretary Hull was 
made an hour earlier at 8:30 p. m., and that his telephone conversation 
with Secretary Hull occurred at 8:45 p. m. (Ex. 58; tr. 1168). This 
evidence leaves two major alternatives (1) Captain Kramer's memory with 
respect to times that evening was faulty and the times he gave should 
all be moved back at least an hour, making his arrival at Secretary 
Knox's apartment prior to 8:30 p. m. Under such circumstances it would 
have been possible for Secretary Knox's reading of the 13-part message 
to have been the immediate reason for arranging the meeting of the three 
Secretaries the next morning, provided it is also assumed that the 
meeting was not arranged during the several conversations among the 
three Secretaries earlier that Saturday; and (2) Captain Kramer's memory 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        433

mittee whether or not Secretary Knox's three telephone calls through the 
White House switchboard were the calls, "apparently to Mr. Hull and Mr. 
Stimson" according to Captain Kramer (tr. 10676), made by Secretary Knox 
after he received and read that evening the first 13 parts (Annex E 
attached hereto) of the intercepted message from Foreign Minister Togo 
to Ambassador Nomura containing the Japanese Government's reply to the 
United States note of November 26. Secretary Knox gave instructions that 
the first 13 parts of that message, together with any additional 
intercepted messages that might become available during the night, 
should be brought to him at the meeting at 10 o'clock the next morning 
at the State Department which had been arranged with Secretaries Hull 
and Stimson (tr. 10676-10677). Captain Kramer, who delivered the 13 
parts to Secretary Knox that evening, testified that the Secretary 
agreed with the conclusion he had placed on it, "that it aimed toward a 
conclusion of negotiations" (tr. 10676), and that nothing was said by 
the Secretary with respect to taking any action on the message (tr. 
10454-10455). 

There is no evidence before the Committee that Secretary Hull saw the 
intercepted Japanese message containing the first 13 parts of the 
Japanese reply before Sunday. Secretary Hull testified that he could not 
"recall definitely the exact time" when he first saw that message (tr. 
14299). Regarding the so-called "pilot message" which preceded it, 
Colonel Bratton, Chief of the Far Eastern Section, Military Intelligence 
Division, who was in charge of the delivery of "magic" to the Secretary 
of State, testified before the Committee that the "pilot" message, which 
was sent by the Japanese Foreign Minister to Ambassador Nomura on 
December 6 (Japan time) and was translated and available in Washington 
the afternoon of December 6 (Washington time), was distributed to the 
Secretary of State around 3 p. m. That afternoon (tr. 12049-12050). That 
message (#901) was as follows: 

"1. The Government has deliberated deeply on the American proposal of 
the 26th of November and as a result we have drawn up a memorandum for 
the United States contained in my separate message #902 (in English). 

"2. This separate message is a very long one. I will send it in fourteen 
parts and I imagine you will receive it tomorrow. However, I am not 
sure. The situation is extremely delicate, and when you receive it I 
want you to please keep it secret for the time being. 

"3. Concerning the time of presenting this memorandum to the United 
States I will wire you in a separate message. However, I want you in the 
meantime to put it in nicely drafted form and make every preparation to 
present it to the Americans just as soon as you receive instructions 
(ex. 1, pp. 238-239)."

Colonel Bratton's testimony in this regard is uncontradicted, and it is 
therefore reasonable to conclude, since deliveries of "magic" were made 
directly to the Secretary of State's office, that Secretary Hull 

[Footnote 1 continued from previous page] with respect to times that 
evening was correct. Under such circumstances it must follow that the 
meeting of the three Secretaries the next morning had been arranged 
before Secretary Knox knew of or saw the 13 part message, unless the 
assumption is also made that Secretary Knox made a second series of 
calls after 9:30 p. m. to Secretary Hull and Secretary Stimson that were 
not made through the White House switchboard and, in the case of 
Secretary Hull, went unrecorded. 

In this general connection, Secretary Hull testified. 

"As r recall it, the meeting in my office on December 7 was the result 
of a mutual agreement on the part of Mr. Stimson, Mr. Knox, and myself. 
It might have been suggested in the first instance by any one or two of 
us three. According to my best recollection, the proposal for a meeting 
grew out of a desire to continue our discussion of the situation created 
by the movement of the huge Japanese armada southward and westward of 
the southernmost point of Indo China" (tr. 14318). 

The log of the duty officer at the Navy Department that Saturday evening 
contains an entry showing that *at 8 p. m.* Secretary Stimson's aide 
telephoned that Secretary Stimson desired certain specified information 
regarding American, British, Dutch, Japanese, and Russian naval vessels 
in the Pacific before 9 a. m., the next morning, that Secretary Knox, 
among others, was consulted in regard to this, and that Secretary Knox 
directed that the information be compiled and delivered to him prior to 
10 a. m. The next morning (tr. 13946-13947, ex. 162). This would seem to 
indicate that the meeting of the three Secretaries had been arranged 
prior to 8 p. m. On Saturday, December 6. 

434             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

saw the "pilot" message that afternoon before leaving the State 
Department. In the case of the first 13 parts of the 14-part message, 
however, the evidence before the Committee as to whether or not the 
first 13 parts were delivered to the State Department before the morning 
of December 7 (Washington time) is contradictory [1] and as stated above 
there is no evidence before the Committee that the first 13 parts were 
seen by Secretary Hull Saturday evening, December 6 (Washington time). 

The evidence before the Committee is uncontradicted, however, that the 
first 13 parts were delivered to President Roosevelt a little after 9:30 
o'clock the evening of December 6 (Washington time). At that time, the 
President and Mr. Harry Hopkins, who was one of the guests at the White 
House dinner party, were in the President's study on the second floor of 
the White House. Commander Schultz, an assistant to Admiral Beardall, 
naval aide to the President, who personally handed the intercepted 
messages to the President, testified that he gained the impression the 
President was expecting them, and that the President read the messages 
and then handed them to Mr. Hopkins, who was pacing back and forth 
slowly. His testimony continued: 

"Commander SCHULZ. Mr. Hopkins then read the papers and handed them back 
to the President. The President then turned toward Mr. Hopkins and said 
in substance-I am not sure of the exact words, but in substance-"This 
means war." Mr. Hopkins agreed, and they discussed then, for perhaps 5 
minutes, the situation of the Japanese forces; that is, their deployment 
and-

"Mr. RlCHARDSON. Can you regal what either of them said? 

"Commander SCHULZ. In substance I can. There are only a few words that I 
can definitely say I am sure of, but the substance of it was that-I 
believe Mr. Hopkins mentioned it first-that since war was imminent, that 
the Japanese intended to strike when they were ready, at a moment when 
all was most opportune for them-

"The CHAIRMAN. When all was what? 

"Commander SCHULZ. When all was most opportune for them. That is, when 
their forces were most properly deployed for their advantage. Indochina 
in particular was mentioned, because the Japanese forces had already 
landed there and there were implications of where they should move next. 

"The President mentioned a message that he had sent to the Japanese 
Emperor concerning the presence of Japanese troops in Indochina, in 
effect requesting their withdrawal. 

"Mr. Hopkins then expressed a view that since war was undoubtedly going 
to come at the convenience of the Japanese, it was too bad that we could 
not strike the first blow and prevent any sort of surprise. The 
President nodded and then said, in effect, "No, we can't do that. We are 
a democracy and a peaceful people." 

[1] Colonel Bratton testified that the last of the 13 parts came into 
his office some time between 9 and 10 o'clock that night and that he was 
in his office when the last of the 13 parts came in (tr. 12049). He 
further testified that he personally delivered the 13 parts to the night 
duty officer at the State Department some time after 10 o'clock that 
night telling the duty officer that it was a "highly important message 
as far as the Secretary of State was concerned" and that it should be 
sent out to Secretary Hull's quarters which he was assured would be done 
(tr. 12052-12053). This testimony is directly contrary to the affidavit 
of Col. Clyde Dusenberry, then Colonel Bratton's chief assistant in the 
Clausen investigation. In his affidavit Colonel Dusenberry stated that 
he specifically recalled the intercepted message in question and that 
"It started coming in the night of 6 December 1941 when I was on duty. 
Colonel Bratton was also on duty then and saw the message coming in and 
he remained until about half of it had been received. Thereupon he left 
and went home at about 9 p. m. I stayed so he could go home and sleep. I 
waited for the remainder. The fourteenth part, being the final part of 
the message was received about 12 that night. Thereupon I left and went 
home. I returned the next morning *to begin the distribution of this 
intercept consisting of the fourteen parts* and *I began the 
distribution of the fourteen parts comprising this intercept* about 9 a. 
m. on 7 December 1941 and finished with the delivery to the State 
Department *as Kurusu and Nomura were meeting with the Secretary of 
State*. When I delivered the copy for OPD that morning I handed it to 
then Colonel Thomas D. Handy who upon reading it said to me: "This means 
war " or words to that effect. *None of these parts comprising this 
intercept was delivered before the morning of 7 December 1941* because 
the first half had been received while Colonel Bratton was on duty and 
he had seen this and had not had it delivered that night" (Clausen, p. 
50). 

Colonel Dusenberry's statements in his affidavit are in accord with the 
testimony of Gen. Sherman Miles, then Chief Of the Military Intelligence 
Division and the superior officer of Colonel Bratton and Colonel 
Dusenberry, who stated that Secretary Hull, Secretary Stimson and the 
others on the War Department's "magic" distribution list received on 
December 6 all intercepted Japanese messages that were translated that 
day up to midnight "*except the first 13 parts of the 14-part message*" 
(tr. 4123-4124). 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           435

Then he raised his voice, and this much I remember definitely. He said, 
"But we have a good record." 

"The impression that I got was that we would have to stand on that 
record, we could not make the first overt move. We would have to wait 
until it came. 

"During this discussion there was no mention of Pearl Harbor. The only 
geographic name I recall was Indochina. The time at which war might 
begin was not discussed, but from the manner of the discussion there was 
no indication that tomorrow was necessarily the day. I carried that 
impression away because it contributed to my personal surprise when the 
news did come. 

"Mr. RlCHARDSON. Was there anything said, Commander, with reference to 
the subject of notice or notification as a result of the papers that 
were being read? 

"Commander SCHULZ. There was no mention made of sending any further 
warning or alert. However, having concluded this discussion about the 
war going to begin at the Japanese convenience, then the President said 
that he believed he would talk to Admiral Stark. He started to get 
Admiral Stark on the telephone. It was then determined-I do not recall 
exactly, but I believe the White House operator told the President that 
Admiral Stark could be reached at the National Theater. 

"Mr. RICHARDSON. Now, was it from what was said there that you draw the 
conclusion that that was what the White House operator reported? 

"Commander SCHULZ. Yes, sir. I did not hear what the operator said, but 
the National Theater was mentioned in my presence, and the President 
went on to state, in substance, that he would reach the Admiral later, 
that he did not want to cause public alarm by having the Admiral paged 
or otherwise when in the theater, where, I believe, the fact that he had 
a box reserved was mentioned and that if he had left suddenly he would 
surely have been seen because of the position which he held and undue 
alarm might be caused, and the President did not wish that to happen 
because he could get him within perhaps another half an hour in any 
case. 

"Mr. RICHARDSON. Was there anything said about telephoning anybody else 
except Stark? 

"Commander SCHULZ. No, sir; there was not (tr. 12436-12444)."

Captain Krick, who testified that he was at the National Theater that 
evening with Admiral Stark, recalled that when he and Admiral Stark 
returned to the latter's home, one of Admiral Stark's servants advised 
the admiral that there had been a White House call during the evening 
(tr. 14757). According to Captain Krick's testimony, Admiral Stark 
retired immediately to his study on the second floor where he had a 
White House phone (tr. 14755). He returned between 5 and 10 minutes 
later, and told Captain Krick that- 

"conditions in the Pacific were serious; that was the substance of it, 
that conditions with Japan were in a critical state, something of that 
sort (tr. 14757)."

Captain Krick testified that while he could not recall that Admiral 
Stark had said upon his return, "I have talked with the President of the 
United States", he had- 

"heard, of course, the statement of the servant that there had been a 
White House call, and the Admiral retired immediately, and he may have 
stated that he was going to call the White House; but I have the 
distinct impression that the conversation was with the White House (tr. 
14758)."

There is no evidence before the Committee of any other action taken by 
President Roosevelt the night of December 6 (Washington time). 

A report that the Japanese Embassy in Washington had burned its codes 
and ciphers the preceding evening was received in the State Department 
from the Navy Department on December 6 (Washington time) (ex. 174). 
Intercepted Japanese messages which were translated in Washington that 
day, in addition to the first 13 parts of the 14-part message, included 
a message dated December 3 (Japan time) instructing the Japanese Embassy 
in Washington to keep its "hidden word" code lists "until the last 
moment" (ex. 1, p. 226); a message 

436             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

requesting Ambassador Nomura to have certain Embassy officials "leave 
(Washington) by plane within the next couple of days" (ex. 1, p. 234); 
Ambassador Nomura's report on his and Ambassador Kurusu's meeting with 
Secretary Hull the day before; and a message dated December 3 from the 
Japanese Ambassador in Rome to Foreign Minister Togo reporting on his 
conference that day with Premier Mussolini and Foreign Minister Ciano 
(ex. 1, pp. 228-229). In the latter report the Ambassador stated that at 
the conference he had described the developments in the Japanese-
American negotiations as set out in message No. 986 from Foreign 
Minister Togo to the Japanese Ambassador in Berlin (which was translated 
and available in Washington on December 1 (Washington time) as has 
already been described). During the course of the conference in Rome, 
the Japanese Ambassador asked Mussolini and Ciano, if Japan should 
declare war on the United States and Great Britain, 

"would Italy do likewise immediately? Mussolini replied: "Of course. She 
is obligated to do so under the terms of the Tripartite Pact. Since 
Germany would also be obliged to follow suit, we would like to confer 
with Germany on this point" (ex. 1, p. 229)."

The fourteenth and final part of the intercepted Japanese message 
containing the text of the Japanese Government's reply to the United 
States' note of November 26 was translated and available in Washington 
the next morning, Sunday, December 7 (Washington time). The record 
before the Committee shows that it was delivered to President Roosevelt 
in his bedroom at the White House about 10 o'clock that morning by 
Admiral Beardall, the President's naval aide (tr. 14010; 14033). Admiral 
Beardall testified that when the President had read it and such other 
messages as accompanied it in the delivery pouch, he turned to the 
admiral and remarked that it looked as if the Japanese were going to 
break off negotiations (tr. 14011; 14034).  While Captain Kramer 
testified that he made a second delivery of "magic" to the White House 
that morning, at about 11 o'clock, Admiral Beardall testified that he 
had no recollection of delivering any other "magic" messages to the 
President (tr. 14034), or of seeing the President again, until after he 
received word at home about 2 o'clock that afternoon of the Japanese 
attack on Pearl Harbor (tr. 14015). 

Secretary Hull testified that he had no record of nor did he recall- 

"having seen or having talked with the President between 9:30 p. m. on 
December 6, 1941 and the moment of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. 
According to my best recollection, I was available during all that 
period (tr. 14319)."

He testified that on Saturday and Sunday up to the time of the Japanese 
attack he- 

"was in constant contact * * * with officers of the State Department and 
of the Army and Navy * * *. It would be impossible to recall the details 
of all the conversations which took place, but I might say that the 
Japanese large-scale military movement from the jumping-off place in 
Southern Indo-China was very much in the minds of all of us who were 
called upon to consider that situation. We were striving to ascertain 
the full significance of those military movements their probable 
destination, etc. (Tr. 14319-14321)." 

That Sunday morning Secretaries Knox and Stimson met with Secretary Hull 
at the State Department. Secretary Hull testified that, according to his 
best recollection, the subject of that conference- 

"was in line with our increasingly frequent conferences over the 
telephone or in person as the dangers and the threatened outbreak in 
Japan increased. 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             437

"For instance, on the day just before we had received all of this 
information from our consuls and from a British dispatch that this 
Japanese armada had left its jumping-off point and was sailing toward 
the Kra Isthmus and * * * Prime Minster Tojo had made a speech * * * a 
little before this. But that, along with these actual movements, 
especially these movements, was the occasion, the chief occasion, I 
think of our conference. 

*             *             *                *                 *

"Senator LUCAS. In the conversations that you had with Secretary Knox 
and Secretary Stimson on Sunday morning of the 7th was there anything 
said in that conversation about the likelihood of Japan attacking Pearl 
Harbor? 

"Mr. HULL. Nothing. As you understand, the attack was then on 
apparently. The fleet was moving toward the Kra Peninsula, which would 
greatly endanger the situation. 

"Mr. KEEFE. Pardon me, Mr. Chairman; I could not get your last answer 
Will you read it, please? 

"Mr. HULL. I said the attack was under way, according to the dispatches 
on the sixth. This fleet was moving, not up north in the Bay of Siam or 
Thailand, but it was, so far as my impression extended, moving toward 
the Kra Isthmus, which was probably a threat all the way down toward 
Singapore, down the peninsula, and not far from Malaya (tr. 1605-16O6)."

The record before the Committee shows that all 14 parts (Annex E) of the 
intercepted Japanese message containing the Japanese reply to the. 
United States note of November 26 were delivered to Secretary Knox at 
the State Department a few minutes before the meeting of the three 
Secretaries (tr. 10468), and that the intercepted message in which 
Foreign Minister Togo directed Ambassador Nomura to deliver the Japanese 
reply to Secretary Hull at 1 p. m. that day (ex. 1, p. 248) was handed 
to one of Secretary Hull's private secretaries at about 10:45 o'clock 
(tr. 10473). These deliveries were made by Captain Kramer, who testified 
that at the time of the second delivery he mentioned to Mr. Hull's 
private secretary the tie-up between 1 p. m. Washington time and "the 
scheme that had been developing for the past week or so in the Southwest 
Pacific with reference to Malaya and the Era Peninsula" (tr. 10472).

A further indication of the matters discussed at the conference of the 
three Secretaries at the State Department that Sunday morning is a 
memorandum entitled "Location of U. S. Naval Forces in the Pacific and 
Far East, as of 7 December 1941" in evidence before the Committee (ex. 
176). In the upper right hand corner of this memorandum appears the 
following handwritten note: "SECNAV (2), 1000", meaning, apparently, two 
copies for the Secretary of the Navy at 10 o'clock. This note, 
considered in conjunction with the log of the duty officer at the Navy 
Department the preceding evening (ex. 162), leaves little doubt that the 
memorandum was prepared expressly for the conference at the State 
Department that morning. The memorandum listed the major ships of the 
United States, Japanese, British, Dutch, and Russian fleets in the 
Pacific Ocean by name, and the destroyers and submarines in those fleets 
by number, giving their location "as of 7 Dec. 1941". The Japanese 
cruisers and destroyers referred to in the Hart message to the Navy 
Department and the Winant telegrams to the State Department the day 
before were listed as "off southern Indochina." The bulk of the Japanese 
Navy was listed as in the two major Japanese naval stations at Kure and 
Sasebo on the main Japanese islands of Honshu and Kyushu. Included among 
the Japanese ships listed by name as in those two Japanese naval 
stations that morning were all of the ships which, it is now known, were 
at that very moment less than 300 miles north 

438             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

of the Hawaiian Islands in the act of launching their bombers and 
torpedo planes for the Japanese attack on the United States Pacific 
Fleet in Pearl Harbor. 

Secretary Stimson's notes for that day, which appear to have been 
written the following day, describe in greater detail the meeting of the 
three Secretaries. 

"Today is the day that the Japanese are going to bring their answer to 
Hull, and everything in MAGIC indicated they had been keeping the time 
back until now in order to accomplish something hanging in the air. Knox 
and I arranged a conference with Hull at 10:30 and we talked the whole 
matter over Hull is very certain that the Japs are planning some 
deviltry and we are all wondering where the blow will strike. We three 
stayed together in conference until lunch time, going over the plans for 
what should be said or done. The main thing is to hold the main people 
who are interested in the Far East together-the British, ourselves, the 
Dutch, the Australians, the Chinese. Hull expressed his views, giving 
the broad picture of it, and I made him dictate it to a stenographer and 
I attach it to the end of this. Knox also had his views as to the 
importance of showing immediately how these different nations must stand 
together and I got him to dictate that and that is attached hereto. Hull 
was to see the Japanese envoys at one o'clock but they were delayed in 
keeping the appointment and did not come until later-as it turned out, 
till 2:00 o'clock or after. * * * The messages which we have been 
getting through Saturday and yesterday and this morning are messages 
which are brought by the British patrol south of Indochina, showing that 
large Japanese forces were moving up into the Gulf of Siam. This itself 
was enough excitement and that was what we were at work on our papers 
about. The observer thought these forces were going to land probably 
either on the eastern side of the Gulf of Siam, where it would be still 
in Indo China, or on the western side, where it would be the Kra 
Peninsula, or probably Malaya. The British were very much excited about 
it and our efforts this morning in drawing our papers was to see whether 
or not we should all act together. The British will have to fight if 
they attack the Kra Peninsula. We three all thought that we must fight 
if the British fought (tr. 14428-14429)." 

The statement dictated by Secretary Hull as referred to in Secretary 
Stimson's notes, follows: 

"PROPOSED STATEMENT FOR PRESIDENT BY HULL

"(See Record, December 7)

"The Japanese Government, dominated by the military fire-eaters, is 
deliberately proceeding on an increasingly broad front to carry out its 
long proclaimed purpose to acquire military control over one-half of the 
world with nearly one-half its population. This inevitably means 
Japanese control of islands, continents, and seas from the Indies back 
near Hawaii, and that all of the conquered peoples would be governed 
militarily, politically, economically, socially, and morally by the 
worst possible military despotism with barbaric, inhuman, and semi-
slavery methods such as Japan has notoriously been inflicting on the 
people in China and Hitler on the peoples of some fifteen conquered 
nations of Europe. This would virtually drive and force all free and 
peaceful peoples off the high seas. 

"At this moment of serious, threatened, and imminent danger, it is 
manifest that control of the South Sea area by Japan is the key to the 
control of the entire Pacific area, and therefore defense of life and 
commerce and other invaluable rights and interests in the Pacific area 
must be commenced within the South Sea area at such times and places as 
in the judgment of naval and military experts would be within sufficient 
time and at such strategic points as would make it most effective. In no 
other way can it be satisfactorily determined that the Pacific area can 
be successfully defended. 

"More than ever is the cohesive, closely related world movement to 
conquer and destroy, with Hitler moving across one-half of the world and 
the Government of Japan under the military group moving across the other 
half of the world by closely synchronizing their efforts and 
collaborating and cooperating whenever to their individual or their 
mutual advantage. 

"This at once places at stake everything that is precious and worth 
while. Self-defense, therefore, is the key point for the preservation of 
each and all of our civilized institutions (tr. 14433-14434)."

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         439

Secretary Knox's statement was as follows: 

"SUGGESTION BY KNOX

"(See Record, December 7)

"1. We are tied up inextricably with the British in the present world 
situation. 

"2. The fall of Singapore and the loss to England of Malaya will 
automatically not only wreck her far eastern position but jeopardize her 
entire effort. 

"3. If the British lose their position the Dutch are almost certain to 
lose theirs. 

"4. If both the British and the Dutch lose their positions we are almost 
certain to be next, being then practically Japanese-surrounded. 

"5. If the above be accepted, then any serious threat to the British or 
the Dutch is a serious threat to the United States; or it might be 
stated any threat to any one of the three of us is a threat to all of 
us. We should therefore be ready jointly to let together and if such 
understanding has not already been reached, it should be reached 
immediately. Otherwise we may fall individually one at a time (or 
somebody may be left out on a limb). 

"6. I think the Japanese should be told that any movement in a direction 
that threatens the United States will be met by force. The President 
will want to reserve to himself just how to define this. The following 
are suggestions to shoot at: Any movement into Thailand; or any movement 
into Thailand west of 100  east and South of 10  North-this in 
accordance with the recommendations of the British and Dutch and United 
States military authorities in the Far East; or any movement against 
British, Dutch, United States, Free French, or Portuguese territory in 
the Pacific area (tr. 14435-14436)."

After the meeting at the State Department, Secretary Stimson went to his 
home for lunch (tr. 14428). Secretary Knox returned to the Navy 
Department. Both his aide, Admiral Beatty, and his confidential 
assistant, Major Dillon, testified that he arrived there from he State 
Department probably about 11:30 o'clock, possibly a little later (tr. 
10239, 10253, 10260). Secretary Hull remained at the State Department. 
At about noon the Japanese Embassy telephoned the State Department and 
asked for an appointment for Ambassador Nomura with Secretary Hull at 1 
p. m. that afternoon. Somewhat later the Embassy telephoned again and 
requested that the appointment be postponed to 1:45 p. m., as Ambassador 
Nomura was not quite ready (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 786). 

That morning the First Secretary of the British Embassy in Washington, 
Mr. W. G. Hayter, called at the State Department on an official of the 
Far Eastern Division. In response to an inquiry whether there was any 
news, Mr. Hayter is reported to have said- 

"after some hesitation, that the British Minister in Thailand had sent a 
message to the (British) Foreign Office, which began "For God's sake" 
and which was endorsed by the Thai Foreign Minister requesting that 
British armed forces *not* move into Thailand" (ex. 169, item 34). 
[Italics in original.]"

At 1:50 o'clock that afternoon the Navy Department received the 
following dispatch from Admiral Husband E. Kimmel, commander in chief of 
the United States Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor, T. H.: 

"Air raid on Pearl Harbor. This is not drill (tr. 14204)."

When this message was brought to Secretary Knox, he was talking with 
Admiral Stark and Admiral Turner, in Major Dillon's office, who 
testified that after reading the message, the Secretary exclaimed: "My 
God, this can't be true, this must mean the Philippines" (tr. 10262). 

Secretary Stimson recorded in his notes for that day that- 

"just about 2 o'clock, while I was sitting at lunch, the President 
called me up on he telephone and in a rather excited voice asked me, 
"Have you heard the news?" said, "Well, I have heard the telegrams which 
have come in about the Japanese advances in the Gulf of Siam." He said, 
"Oh no, I don't mean that. They have 

440                 PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

attacked Hawaii. They are now bombing Hawaii." Well, that was an 
excitement indeed (tr. 14428-14429)."

Secretary Hull testified that President Roosevelt telephoned him before 
the Japanese Ambassadors reached the State Department and told him 
"There was a report that Pearl Harbor had been attacked" [1] (tr. 1594). 
He continued: 

"I discussed before they came whether I would accredit that report as 
the unquestioned truth of the situation and refuse to admit them or 
whether in view of the extremely delicate relations I would leave open 
the one chance in ten or more that the report was not correct. I 
proceeded to receive and confer with them although I felt that the 
chances were altogether virtually certain that the report was true (tr. 
1594)."

The Japanese Ambassadors arrived at the State Department at 2:05 p. m., 
but were not admitted to Secretary Hull's office until 2:20 p. m. (ex. 
29, vol. II, p. 786). According to the official State Department record 
of the meeting Ambassador Nomura stated- 

"that he had been instructed to deliver at 1:00 p. m. the document which 
he handed the Secretary, but that he was sorry that he had been delayed 
owing to the need of more time to decode the message. The Secretary 
asked why he had specified one o'clock. The Ambassador replied that he 
did not know but that that was his instruction. 

"The Secretary said that anyway he was receiving the message at two 
o'clock (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 786-787)."

The document Ambassador Nomura handed Secretary Hull was the full text 
of the memorandum contained in the 14-part message that had been before 
the three Secretaries at their conference that morning, the first 13 
parts of which had been seen by Secretary Knox and President Roosevelt 
the evening before. The full message as intercepted before its delivery 
to Secretary Hull is printed as Annex E attached hereto. Secretary Hull 
testified that the first few pages defined "the Japanese attitude just 
the reverse of what it was," as "Peace, peace, peace," and the next few 
pages defined the American attitude "as just the reverse of what it was" 
(tr. 1594). The final paragraph, which had been contained in the 
fourteenth part of the intercepted message and had not been seen by 
either the President or any of the three Secretaries before 10 o'clock 
that morning, was as follows: 

"7. Obviously it is the intention of the American Government to conspire 
with Great British and other countries to obstruct Japan's efforts 
toward the establishment of peace through the creation of a New Order in 
East Asia, and especially to preserve Anglo-American rights and 
interests by keeping Japan and China at war. This intention has been 
revealed clearly during the course of the present negotiations. Thus, 
the earnest hope of the Japanese Government to adjust Japanese-American 
relations and to preserve and promote the peace of the Pacific through 
cooperation with the American Government has finally been lost. 

"*The Japanese Government regrets to have to notify hereby the American 
Government that in view of the attitude of the American Government it 
cannot but consider that it is impossible to reach an agreement through 
further negotiations* (ex. 1, p. 245; ex. 29, vol. II, p. 792)."

Secretary Hull testified that at the time he- 

"felt and knew of the extreme probability that the Pearl Harbor report 
was true. I felt like taking liberties in talking to them about their 
government in what would not be diplomatic language in ordinary times 
(tr. 1595)."

Secretary Hull interrupted his reading of the memorandum to ask 
Ambassador Nomura whether the memorandum was presented under 

[1] Under Secretary Welles also testified that he first learned of the 
attack through a telephone call from President Roosevelt (tr. 1322; 
1362-1373)."

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         441

instructions from the Japanese Government. The Ambassador replied that 
it was. When he finished reading, Secretary Hull turned to the Japanese 
Ambassador and said: 

"I must say that in all my conversations with you during the last nine 
months I have never uttered one word of untruth. This is borne out 
absolutely by the record. In all my fifty years of public service I have 
never seen a document that was more crowded with infamous falsehoods and 
distortions-infamous falsehoods and distortions on a scale so huge that 
I never imagined until today that any Government on this planet was 
capable of uttering them (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 787)."

According to the official State Department records of the meeting the 
two Japanese Ambassadors "then took their leave without making any 
comment" (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 787). 

Later that afternoon, Secretary Hull issued the following statement: 

"Japan has made a treacherous and utterly unprovoked attack upon the 
United States. 

"At the very moment when representatives of the Japanese Government were 
discussing with representatives of this Government, at the request of 
the former principles and courses of peace, the armed forces of Japan 
were preparing and assembling at various strategic points to launch new 
attacks and new aggressions upon nations and peoples with which Japan 
was professedly at peace including the United States. 

"I am now releasing for the information of the American people the 
statement of principles governing the policies of the Government of the 
United States and setting out suggestions for a comprehensive peaceful 
settlement covering the entire Pacific area, which I handed to the 
Japanese Ambassador on November 26, 1941.

"I am likewise releasing the text of a Japanese reply thereto which was 
handed to me by the Japanese Ambassador today. Before the Japanese 
Ambassador delivered this final statement from his Government the 
treacherous attack upon the United States had taken place. 

"This Government has stood for all the principles that underlie fair 
dealing, peace, law and order, and justice between nations and has 
steadfastly striven to promote and maintain that state of relations 
between itself and all other nations. 

"It is now apparent to the whole world that Japan in its recent 
professions of a desire for peace has been infamously false and 
fraudulent (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 793)."

The surprise Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor had begun at 1:25 o'clock 
that Sunday afternoon (Washington time). It was followed almost 
immediately by a Japanese attack upon Thailand at various places on its 
land and sea frontiers. Five and half hours after the attack on Thailand 
commenced the Thai Government gave the order to cease fire (ex. 169). At 
3 p. m. On December 7 (Washington time) the first Japanese attacks on 
Singapore were made; at 3:40 p. m. (Washington time) the Japanese 
attacked Khota Baru in British Malaya; at 6:10 p. m. (Washington time) 
they attacked the Gulf of Davao in the Philippine Islands and the Island 
of Guam (tr. 14127) 

In Tokyo, in the meantime, after receiving from Ambassador Grew a copy 
of President Roosevelt's message to Emperor Hirohito, Foreign Minister 
Togo had gone to Premier Tojo's official residence with a summary 
translation of the President's message, and there, at an emergency 
conference with the Premier and the other members of the Cabinet, had 
determined the line of action to be taken (ex. 132, item 1, p. 2). At 7 
a. m., December 8 (Japan time) Ambassador Grew was awakened by a 
telephone call from an official of the Japanese Foreign Office who 
requested him to call on Foreign Minister Togo as soon as possible (ex. 
30, p. 493). When Ambassador Grew arrived, Foreign Minister Togo, "grim 
and formal," handed him the Japanese Government's memorandum breaking 
off the negotiations. The Foreign Minister said that he had been in 
touch with Emperor Hirohito, 

442             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

who desired that the memorandum be regarded as his reply to President 
Roosevelt's message. Ambassador Grew reported to the State Department 
that the Foreign Minister thereupon made to him the following oral 
statement: 

"His Majesty has expressed his gratefulness and appreciation for the 
cordial message of the President. He has graciously let known his wishes 
to the Foreign Minister to convey the following to the President as a 
reply to the latter's message: 

" "Some days ago, the President made inquiries regarding the 
circumstances of the augmentation of Japanese forces in French Indochina 
to which His Majesty has directed the Government to reply. Withdrawal of 
Japanese forces from French Indochina constitutes one of the subject 
matters of the Japanese-American negotiations. His Majesty has commanded 
the Government to state its views to the American Government also on 
this question. It is, therefore, desired that the President will kindly 
refer to this reply. 

" "Establishment of peace in the Pacific, and consequently of the world, 
has been the cherished desire of His Majesty for the realization of 
which he has hitherto made his Government to continue its earnest 
endeavors. His Majesty trusts that the President is fully aware of this 
fact" (ex. 178)."

Following his conference with Ambassador Grew, Foreign Minister Togo 
arranged a conference with the British Ambassador, Sir Robert Craigie. 
Upon his arrival, the Foreign Minister informed the British Ambassador 
that it had become necessary to break off the Japanese-American 
negotiations, and handed him a copy of the memorandum he had previously 
given to Ambassador Grew (ex. 132, item 2). 

While Foreign Minister Togo was holding his conferences with the 
American and British Ambassadors, a meeting of the Committee of 
Advisement of the Privy Council, attended by all of the other members of 
the Japanese Cabinet and certain other Japanese governmental officials, 
was in progress in the Imperial Palace. At this meeting the committee 
considered and approved an Address of Advisement to the Throne and a 
draft of an Imperial Rescript declaring war against the United States 
and Great Britain. One of the officials present at the meeting asked 
Premier Tojo what Germany's attitude would be. Premier Tojo replied that 
"Germany's entrance in the war in our support is almost certain, and 
negotiations to that effect are now in progress" (ex. 132, item 3). 
Following the meeting of the Committee of Advisement, a full session of 
the Privy Council in the presence of Emperor Hirohito, was held in the 
Imperial Palace. At this meeting the address to the Throne was presented 
and unanimously approved. Later that morning, Ambassador Grew received 
the following communication: 

"EXCELLENCY: 

"I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that there has arisen a 
state of war between Your Excellency's country and Japan beginning 
today. 

"I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to Your Excellency the 
assurances of my highest consideration. 

"SHIGENORI TOGO,
"Minister of Foreign Affairs.
"(Ex. 30, p. 499.)"

In Washington, Sunday evening, December 7 (Washington time), a meeting 
of the Cabinet called by President Roosevelt took place in the White 
House at 8:30 o'clock (tr. 14430). The President opened the meeting by 
stating that it was the most serious Cabinet meeting that had taken 
place since 1861, and he then described the Japanese attack at Pearl 
Harbor so far as it was known at the time. After this the President read 
a draft of a brief message to Congress which he had prepared. According 
to Secretary Stimson's notes, the draft 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK               443

presented much the same thoughts as were actually presented the 
following day to Congress (tr. 14431). The Cabinet meeting lasted over 
three-quarters of an hour, after which the majority and minority leaders 
of Congress joined the President and the Cabinet for a meeting which 
lasted for over 2 hours. At this meeting the President reviewed the 
events of the preceding weeks and described the events of that Sunday in 
Washington and at Pearl Harbor. The President asked whether the members 
of Congress would invite him to appear before a joint session the 
following day and was told that they would. He said that he could not 
tell them exactly what he was going to say, because events were changing 
so rapidly (tr. 14431-14432; ex. 160). 

The next day, December 8 (Washington time), shortly after noon, 
President Roosevelt delivered the following address before a joint 
session of Congress: 

"TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES: 

"Yesterday, December 7, 1941-a date which will live in infamy-the United 
States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and 
air forces of the Empire of Japan. 

"The United States was at peace with that Nation and, at the 
solicitation of Japan, was still in conversation with its Government and 
its Emperor looking toward the maintenance of peace in the Pacific. 
Indeed, one hour after Japanese air squadrons had commenced bombing in 
Oahu, the Japanese Ambassador to the United States and his colleague 
delivered to the Secretary of State a formal reply to a recent American 
message. While this reply stated that it seemed useless to continue the 
existing diplomatic negotiations, it contained no threat or hint of war 
or armed attack. 

"It will be recorded that the distance of Hawaii from Japan makes it 
obvious that the attack was deliberately planned many days or even weeks 
ago. During the intervening time the Japanese Government has 
deliberately sought to deceive the United States by false statements and 
expressions of hope for continued peace. 

"The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian Islands has caused severe damage 
to American naval and military forces. Very many American lives have 
been lost. In addition, American ships have been reported torpedoed on 
the high seas between San Francisco and Honolulu. 

"Yesterday the Japanese Government also launched an attack against 
Malaya. 

"Last night Japanese forces attacked Hong Kong. 

"Last night Japanese forces attacked Guam. 

"Last night Japanese forces attacked the Philippine Islands. 

"Last night the Japanese attacked Wake Island. 

"This morning the Japanese attacked Midway Island. 

"Japan has, therefore, undertaken a surprise offensive extending 
throughout the Pacific area. The facts of yesterday speak for 
themselves. The people of the United States have already formed their 
opinions and well understand the implications to the very life and 
safety of our Nation. 

"As Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy I have directed that all 
measures be taken for our defense. 

"Always will we remember the character of the onslaught against us. 

"No matter how long it may take us to overcome this premeditated 
invasion, the American people in their righteous might will win through 
to absolute victory. 

"I believe I interpret the will of the Congress and of the people when I 
assert that we will not only defend ourselves to the uttermost but will 
make very certain that this form of treachery shall never endanger us 
again. 

"Hostilities exist. There is no blinking at the fact that our people, 
our territory and our interests are in grave danger. 

"With confidence in our armed forces-with the unbounded determination of 
our people-we will gain the inevitable triumph-so help us God. 

"I ask that the Congress declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly 
attack by Japan on Sunday, December seventh, a state of war has existed 
between the United States and the Japanese Empire (ex. 29, vol. II, pp. 
793-794)."

Within an hour after President Roosevelt finished his address, the 
Senate and House of Representatives, acting independently, passed 

444             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

the following resolution, the Senate by a vote of 82 to 0 and the House 
of Representatives by a vote of 388 to 1: 

"JOINT RESOLUTION Declaring that a state of war exists between the 
Imperial Government of Japan and the Government and the people of the 
United States and making provisions to prosecute the same

"Whereas the Imperial Government of Japan has committed unprovoked acts 
of war against the Government and the people of the United States of 
America: Therefore be it 

"*Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled*, That the state of war between 
the United States and the Imperial Government of Japan which has thus 
been thrust upon the United States is hereby formally declared; and the 
President is hereby authorized and directed to employ the entire naval 
and military forces of the United States and the resources of the 
Government to carry on war against the Imperial Government of Japan; 
and, to bring the conflict to a successful termination, all of the 
resources of the country are hereby pledged by the Congress of the 
United States (ex. 29, vol. II, p. 795)."

The declaration of war against Japan was signed by President Roosevelt 
at 4:10 p. m. that afternoon, December 8 (Washington time). 

ANNEX A             445

Draft Proposal Handed by Ambassador Nomura to Secretary Hull on May 12 
(Washington time)

CONFIDENTIAL MEMORANDUM AGREED UPON BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED 
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF JAPAN 

The Governments of the United States and of Japan accept joint 
responsibility for the initiation and conclusion of a general agreement 
disposing the resumption of our traditional friendly relations. 

Without reference to specific causes of recent estrangement, it is the 
sincere desire of both Governments that the incidents which led to the 
deterioration of amicable sentiment among our peoples should be 
prevented from recurrence and corrected in their unforeseen and 
unfortunate consequences. 

It is our present hope that, by a joint effort, our nations may 
establish a just peace in the Pacific; and by the rapid consummation of 
an *entente cordiale* [*amicable understanding*], arrest, if not dispel, 
the tragic confusion, that now threatens to engulf civilization. 

For such decisive action, protracted negotiations would seem ill-suited 
and weakening. Both Governments, therefore, desire that adequate 
instrumentalities should be developed for the realization of a general 
agreement which would bind, meanwhile, both Governments in honor and in 
act. 

It is our belief that such an understanding should comprise only the 
pivotal issues of urgency and not the accessory concerns which could be 
deliberated at a conference and appropriately confirmed by our 
respective Governments. 

Both Governments presume to anticipate that they could achieve 
harmonious relations if certain situations and attitudes were clarified 
or improved; to wit: 

1. The concepts of the United States and of Japan respecting 
international relations and the character of nations. 

2. The attitude of both Governments toward the European War.

3. The relations of both nations toward the China Affair. 

4. Commerce between both nations. 

5. Economic activity of both nations in the Southwestern Pacific area. 

6. The policies of both nations affecting political stabilization in the 
Pacific area. 

Accordingly, we have come to the following mutual understanding:- 

I. The concepts of the United States and of Japan respecting 
international relations and the character of nations. 

The Governments of the United States and of Japan jointly acknowledge 
each other as equally sovereign states and contiguous Pacific powers. 

446             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

Both Governments assert the unanimity of their national policies as 
directed toward the foundation of a lasting peace and the inauguration 
of a new era of respectful confidence and cooperation among our peoples. 

Both Governments declare that it is their traditional, and present, 
concept and conviction that nations and races compose, as members of a 
family, one household; each equally enjoying rights and admitting 
responsibilities with a mutuality of interests regulated by peaceful 
processes and directed to the pursuit of their moral and physical 
welfare, which they are bound to defend for themselves as they are bound 
not to destroy for others; they further admit their responsibilities to 
oppose the oppression or exploitation of backward nations. 

Both Governments are firmly determined that their respective traditional 
concepts on the character of nations and the underlying moral principles 
of social order and national life will continue to be preserved and 
never transformed by foreign ideas or ideologies contrary to these moral 
principles and concepts. 

II. The attitude of both Governments toward the European War. 

The Governments of the United States and Japan make it their common aim 
to bring about the world peace; they shall therefore jointly endeavour 
not only to prevent further extension of the European War but also 
speedily to restore peace in Europe. 

The Government of Japan maintains that its alliance with the Axis Powers 
was, and is, defensive and designed to prevent the nations which are not 
at present directly affected by the European War from engaging in it. 

The Government of Japan maintains that its obligations of military 
assistance under the Tripartite Pact between Japan, Germany and Italy 
will be applied in accordance with the stipulation of Article 3 of the 
said Pact. 

The Government of the United States maintains that its attitude toward 
the European War is, and will continue to be, directed by no such 
aggressive measures as to assist any one nation against another. The 
United States maintains that it is pledged to the hate of war, and 
accordingly, its attitude toward the European War is, and will continue 
to be, determined solely and exclusively by considerations of the 
protective defense of its own national welfare and security. 

III. The relations of both nations toward the China Affair. 

The Government of the United States, acknowledging the three principles 
as enunciated in the Konoe Statement and the principles set forth on the 
basis of the said three principles in the treaty with the Nanking 
Government as well as in the Joint Declaration of Japan, Manchoukuo and 
China and relying upon the policy of the Japanese Government to 
establish a relationship of neighborly friendship with China, shall 
forthwith request the Chiang Kai-shek regime to negotiate peace with 
Japan. 

IV. Commerce between both nations. 

When official approbation to the present Understanding has been given by 
both Governments, the United States and Japan shall assure each other to 
mutually supply such commodities as are, respectively, available or 
required by either of them. Both Governments further consent to take 
necessary steps to the resumption of normal trade 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           447

relations as formerly established under the Treaty of Commerce and 
Navigation between the United States and Japan. 

V. Economic activity of both nations in the Southwestern Pacific area. 
Having in view that the Japanese expansion in the direction of the 
Southwestern Pacific area is declared to be of peaceful nature, American 
cooperation shall be given in the production and procurement of natural 
resources (such as oil, rubber, tin, nickel) which Japan needs. 

VI. The policies of both nations affecting political stabilization in 
the Pacific area. 

a. The Governments of the United States and Japan jointly guarantee the 
independence of the Philippine Islands on the condition that the 
Philippine Islands shall maintain a status of permanent neutrality. The 
Japanese subjects shall not be subject to any discriminatory treatment. 

b. Japanese immigration to the United States shall receive amicable 
consideration-on a basis of equality with other nationals and freedom 
from discrimination. 

Addendum. 

The present Understanding shall be kept a confidential memorandum 
between the Governments of the United States and of Japan. 

The scope, character and timing of the announcement of this 
Understanding will be agreed upon by both Governments. 

ORAL EXPLANATION FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE ORIGINAL DRAFT 

II. Par. 2.

Attitude of Both Governments toward the European War.

Actually the meaning of this paragraph is virtually unchanged but we 
desire to make it clearer by specifying a reference to the Pact. As long 
as Japan is a member of the Tripartite Pact, such stipulation as is 
mentioned in the Understanding seems unnecessary. 

If we must have any stipulation at all, in addition, it would be 
important to have one which would clarify the relationship of this 
Understanding to the aforementioned Pact. 

III.

China Affair. 

The terms for China-Japan peace as proposed in the original 
Understanding differ in no substantial way from those herein affirmed as 
the "principles of Konoe." Practically, the one can be used to explain 
the other. 

We should obtain an understanding, in a separate and secret document, 
that the United States would discontinue her assistance to the Chiang 
Kai-shek regime if Chiang Kai-shek does not accept the advice of the 
United States that he enter into negotiations for peace. 

If, for any reason, the United States finds it impossible to sign such a 
documents a definite pledge by some highest authorities will suffice. 

The three principles of Prince Konoe as referred to in this paragraph 
are: 

1. Neighborly friendship; 

2. Joint defense against communism; 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         448

3. Economic cooperation-by which Japan does not intend to exercise 
economic monopoly in China nor to demand of China a limitation in the 
interests of Third Powers. 

The following are implied in the aforesaid principles: 

1. Mutual respect of sovereignty and territories; 

2. Mutual respect for the inherent characteristics of each nation 
cooperating as good neighbors and forming a Far Eastern nucleus 
contributing to world peace; 

3. Withdrawal of Japanese troops from Chinese territory in accordance 
with an agreement to be concluded between Japan and China; 

4. No annexation, no indemnities; 

5. Independence of Manchoukuo. 

III. 

Immigration to China. 

The stipulation regarding large-scale immigration to China has been 
deleted because it might give an impression, maybe a mistaken 
impression, to the Japanese people who have been offended by the past 
immigration legislation of the United States, that America is now taking 
a dictating attitude even toward the question of Japanese immigration in 
China. 

Actually, the true meaning and purpose of this stipulation is fully 
understood and accepted by the Japanese Government. 

IV. 

Naval, Aerial and Mercantile Marine Relations. 

(a) and (c) of this section have been deleted not because of 
disagreement but because it would be more practical, and possible, to 
determine the disposition of naval forces and mercantile marine after an 
understanding has been reached and relations between our two countries 
improved; and after our present China commitments are eliminated. Then 
we will know the actual situation and can act accordingly. 

Courtesy visit of naval squadrons. 

This proposal, (b) of IV might better be made a subject of a separate 
memorandum. Particular care must be taken as to the timing, manner and 
scope of carrying out such a gesture. 

V. 

Gold Credit. 

The proposal in the second paragraph of V has been omitted for the same 
reasons as suggested the omission of paragraphs (a) and (c). 

VI.

Activity in Southwestern Pacific Area. 

The words, in the first paragraph, "without resorting to arms" have been 
deleted as inappropriate and unnecessarily critical. Actually, the 
peaceful policy of the Japanese Government has been made clear on many 
occasions in various statements made both by the Premier and the Foreign 
Minister. 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         449

VIII. [VII]

Political Stabilization in the Pacific Area. 

As the paragraph (a) implying military and treaty obligation would 
require, for its enactment, such a complicated legislative procedure in 
both countries, we consider it inappropriate to include this in the 
present Understanding. 

Paragraph (b) regarding the independence of the Philippine Islands has 
been altered for the same reason. 

In paragraph (c) [(d)] the words "and to the Southwestern Pacific Area" 
have been omitted because such questions should be settled, as necessity 
arises, through direct negotiation with the authorities in the 
Southwestern areas by the Government of the United States and of Japan 
respectively. 

Conference. 

The stipulation for holding a Conference has been deleted. We consider 
that it would be better to arrange, by an exchange of letters, that a 
conference between the President and the Premier or between suitable 
representatives of theirs will be considered when both the United States 
and Japan deem it useful to hold such a conference after taking into due 
consideration the effect resulting from the present Understanding. 

Announcement. 

In regard to the statement to be issued on the successful conclusion of 
the present Understanding a draft will be prepared in Tokio and cabled 
to Washington for the consideration of the United States Government. 

(Ex. 29, Vol. II, pp. 420-425.) 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK           450

ANNEX B

Draft Proposal Handed by Secretary Hull to Ambassador Nomura on June 21 
(Washington time)

Unofficial, Exploratory And Without Commitment 

[WASHINGTON,] June 21, 1941. 

The Governments of the United States and of Japan accept joint 
responsibility for the initiation and conclusion of a general agreement 
of understanding as expressed in a joint declaration for the resumption 
of traditional friendly relations. 

Without reference to specific causes of recent estrangement, it is the 
sincere desire of both Governments that the incidents which led to the 
deterioration of amicable sentiment between their countries should be 
prevented from recurrence and corrected in their unforeseen and 
unfortunate consequences. 

It is our earnest hope that, by a cooperative effort, the United States 
and Japan may contribute effectively toward the establishment and 
preservation of peace in the Pacific area and, by the rapid consummation 
of an amicable understanding, encourage world peace and arrest, if not 
dispel, the tragic confusion that now threatens to engulf civilization. 

For such decisive action, protracted negotiations would seem ill-suited 
and weakening. Both Governments, therefore, desire that adequate 
instrumentalities should be developed for the realization of a general 
understanding which would bind, meanwhile, both Governments in honor and 
in act. 

It is the belief of the two Governments that such an understanding 
should comprise only the pivotal issues of urgency and not the accessory 
concerns which could be deliberated later at a conference. 

Both Governments presume to anticipate that they could achieve 
harmonious relations if certain situations and attitudes were clarified 
or improved; to wit: 

1. The concepts of the United States and of Japan respecting 
international relations and the character of nations. 

2. The attitudes of both Governments toward the European war. 

3. Action toward a peaceful settlement between China and Japan. 

4. Commerce between both nations. 

5 Economic activity of both nations in the Pacific area. 

6 The policies of both nations affecting political stabilization in the 
Pacific area.

7. Neutralization of the Philippine Islands. 

Accordingly, the Government of the United States and the Government of 
Japan have come to the following mutual understanding and declaration of 
policy: 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             451

I. The concepts of the United States and of Japan respecting 
international relations and the character of nations. 

Both governments affirm that their national policies are directed toward 
the foundation of a lasting peace and the inauguration of a new era of 
reciprocal confidence and cooperation between our peoples. 

Both Governments declare that it is their traditional, and present 
concept and conviction that nations and races compose, as members of a 
family, one household living under the ideal of universal concord 
through justice and equity; each equally enjoying rights and admitting 
responsibilities with a mutuality of interests regulated by peaceful 
processes and directed to the pursuit of their moral and physical 
welfare, which they are bound to defend for themselves as they are bound 
not to destroy for others; they further admit their responsibilities to 
oppose the oppression or exploitation of other peoples. 

Both Governments are firmly determined that their respective traditional 
concepts on the character of nations and the underlying moral principles 
of social order and national life will continue to be preserved and 
never transformed by foreign ideas or ideologies contrary to those moral 
principles and concepts. 

II. The attitudes of both Governments toward the European war. 

The Government of Japan maintains that the purpose of the Tripartite 
Pact was, and is, defensive and is designed to contribute to the 
prevention of an unprovoked extension of the European war. 

The Government of the United States maintains that its attitude toward 
the European hostilities is and will continue to be determined solely 
and exclusively by considerations of protection and self-defense: its 
national security and the defense thereof. 

NOTE (There is appended a suggested draft of an exchange of letters as a 
substitute for the Annex and Supplement on the Part of the Government of 
the United States on this subject which constituted a part of the United 
States draft of May 31, 1941. 

III. Action toward a peaceful settlement between China and Japan. 

The Japanese Government having communicated to the Government of the 
United States the general terms within the framework of which the 
Japanese Government will propose the negotiation of a peaceful 
settlement with the Chinese Government, which terms are declared by the 
Japanese Government to be in harmony with the Konoe principles regarding 
neighborly friendship and mutual respect of sovereignty and territories 
and with the practical application of those principles, the President of 
the United States will suggest to the Government of China that the 
Government of China and the Government of Japan enter into a negotiation 
on a basis mutually advantageous and acceptable for a termination of 
hostilities and resumption of peaceful relations. 

NOTE (The foregoing draft of Section III is subject to further 
discussion of the question of cooperative defense against communistic 
activities, including the stationing of Japanese troops in Chinese 
territory, and the question of economic cooperation between China and 
Japan. With regard to suggestions that the, language of Section III be 
changed, it is believed that consideration of any suggested change can 
most advantageously be given 

452                  PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

after all the points in the annex relating to this section have been 
satisfactorily worked out, when the section and its annex can, be viewed 
as a whole.) 

IV. Commerce between both nations. 

When official approbation to the present understanding has been given by 
both Governments, the United States and Japan shall assure each other 
mutually to supply such commodities as are, respectively, available and 
required by either of them. Both Governments further consent to take 
necessary steps to resume normal trade relations as formerly established 
under the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation between the United States 
and Japan. If a new commercial treaty is desired by both Governments, it 
would be negotiated as soon as possible and be concluded in accordance 
with usual procedures. 

V. Economic activity of both nations in the Pacific area. 

On the basis of mutual pledges hereby given that Japanese activity and 
American activity in the Pacific area shall be carried on by peaceful 
means and in conformity with the principle of non-discrimination in 
international commercial relations, the Japanese Government and the 
Government of the United States agree to cooperate each with the other 
toward obtaining non-discriminatory access by Japan and by the United 
States to commercial supplies of natural resources (such as oil, rubber, 
tin, nickel) which each country needs for the safeguarding and 
development of its own economy. 

VI. The policies of both nations affecting political stabilization in 
the Pacific area. 

Both Governments declare that the controlling policy underlying this 
understanding is peace in the Pacific area; that it is their fundamental 
purpose, through cooperative effort, to contribute to the maintenance 
and the preservation of peace in the Pacific area; and that neither has 
territorial designs in the area mentioned. 

VII. Neutralization of the Philippine Islands. 

The Government of Japan declares its willingness to enter at such time 
as the Government of the United States may desire into negotiation with 
the Government of the United States with a view to the conclusion of a 
treaty for the neutralization of the Philippine Islands, when Philippine 
independence shall have been achieved. 

[Annex 1 to Annex B]

ANNEX AND SUPPLEMENT ON THE PART OF THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT

III. Action toward a peaceful settlement between China and Japan. 

The basic terms as referred to in the above section are as follows: 

1. Neighborly friendship. 

2. (Cooperative defense against injurious communistic activities- 
including the stationing of Japanese troops in Chinese territory.) 
Subject to further discussion. 

3. (Economic cooperation.) Subject to agreement on an exchange of 
letters in regard to the application to this point of the principle of 
non-discrimination in international commercial relations. 

4. Mutual respect of sovereignty and territories. 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK             453

5. Mutual respect for the inherent characteristics of each nation 
cooperating as good neighbors and forming an East Asian nucleus 
contributing to world Peace. 

6. Withdrawal of Japanese armed forces from Chinese territory as 
promptly as possible and in accordance with an agreement to be concluded 
between Japan and China. 

7. No annexation. 

8. No indemnities. 

9. Amicable negotiation in regard to Manchoukuo. 

[Annex 2 to Annex B]

ANNEX AND SUPPLEMENT ON THE PART OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES

IV. Commerce between both nations. 

It is understood that during the present international emergency Japan 
and the United States each shall permit export to the other of 
commodities in amounts up to the figures of usual or pre-war trade, 
except, in the case of each, commodities which it needs for its own 
purposes of security and self-defense. These limitations are mentioned 
to clarify the obligations of each Government. They are not intended as 
restrictions against either Government; and, it is understood, both 
Governments will apply such regulations in the spirit dominating 
relations with friendly nations. 

[Annex 3 to Annex B]

SUGGESTED EXCHANGE OF LETTERS BETWEEN THE SECRETARY OF STATE AND THE 
JAPANESE AMBASSADOR

The Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador: 

EXCELLENCY: In Section II of the Joint Declaration which was entered 
into today on behalf of our two Governments, statements are made with 
regard to the attitudes of the two Governments toward the European war. 
During the informal conversations which resulted in the conclusion of 
this Joint Declaration I explained to you on a number of occasions the 
attitude and policy of the Government of the United States toward the 
hostilities in Europe and I pointed out that this attitude and policy 
were based on the inalienable right of self-defense. I called special 
attention to an address which I delivered on April 24 setting forth 
fully the position of this Government upon this subject. 

I am sure that you are fully cognizant of this Government's attitude 
toward the European war but in order that there may be no 
misunderstanding I am again referring to the subject. I shall be glad to 
receive from you confirmation by the Government of Japan that, with 
regard to the measures which this nation may be forced to adopt in 
defense of its own security, which have been set forth as indicated, the 
Government of Japan is not under any commitment which would require 
Japan to take any action contrary to or destructive of the fundamental 
objective of the present agreement, to establish and to preserve peace 
in the Pacific area. 

Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration. 

454             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

The Japanese Ambassador to the Secretary of State: 

EXCELLENCY: I have received your letter of June-. 

I wish to state that my Government is fully aware of the attitude of the 
Government of the United States toward the hostilities in Europe as 
explained to me by you during our recent conversations and as set forth 
in your address of April 24. I did not fail to report to my Government 
the policy of the Government of the United States as it had been 
explained to me, and I may assure you that my Government understands and 
appreciates the attitude and position of the Government of the United 
States with regard to the European war. 

I wish also to assure you that the Government of Japan, with regard to 
the measures which the Government of the United States may be forced to 
adopt in defense of its own security, is not under any commitment 
requiring Japan to take any action contrary to or destructive of the 
fundamental objective of the present agreement 

The Government of Japan, fully cognizant of its responsibilities freely 
assumed by the conclusion of this agreement, is determined to take no 
action inimical to the establishment and preservation of peace in the 
Pacific area. 

Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my most distinguished 
consideration. 

[Annex 4 to Annex B]

SUGGESTED LETTER To BE ADDRESSED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO THE 
JAPANESE AMBASSADOR IN CONNECTION WITH THE JOINT DECLARATION 

EXCELLENCY: In the informal conversations which resulted in the 
conclusion of a general agreement of understanding between our two 
Governments, you and your associates expressed fully and frankly views 
on the intentions of the Japanese Government in regard to applying to 
Japan's proposed economic cooperation with China the principle of non-
discrimination in international commercial relations. It is believed 
that it would be helpful if you could be so good as to confirm the 
statements already expressed orally in the form of replies on the 
following points: 

1. Does the term "economic cooperation" between Japan and China 
contemplate the granting by the Government of China to the Japanese 
Government or its nationals of any preferential or monopolistic rights 
which would discriminate in favor of the Japanese Government and 
Japanese nationals as compared with the Government and nationals of the 
United States and of other third countries? Is it contemplated that upon 
the inauguration of negotiations for a peaceful settlement between Japan 
and China the special Japanese companies, such as the North China 
Development Company and the Central China Promotion Company and their 
subsidiaries, will be divested, in so far as Japanese official support 
may be involved, of any monopolistic or other preferential rights that 
they may exercise in fact or that may inure to them by virtue of present 
circumstances in areas of China under Japanese military occupation? 

2. With regard to existing restrictions upon freedom of trade and travel 
by nationals of third countries in Chinese territory 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            455

under Japanese military occupation, could the Japanese Government 
indicate approximately what restrictions will be removed immediately 
upon the entering into by the Government of Chungking of negotiations 
with the Government of Japan and what restrictions will be removed at 
later dates, with an indication in each case in so far as possible of 
the approximate time within which removal of restrictions would be 
effected? 

3. Is it the intention of the Japanese Government that the Chinese 
Government shall exercise full and complete control of matters relating 
to trade, currency and exchange? Is it the intention of the Japanese 
Government to withdraw and to redeem the Japanese military notes which 
are being circulated in China and the notes of Japanese-sponsored 
regimes in China? Can the Japanese Government indicate how soon after 
the inauguration of the contemplated negotiations arrangements to the 
above ends can in its opinion be carried out? 

It would be appreciated if as specific replies as possible could be made 
to the questions above listed. 

Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.

(Ex. 29, Vol. II, pp. 486-492.) 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK        456

ANNEX C

TEXT OF BASIC JAPANESE TERMS OF PEACE WITH CHINA

1. Neighborly friendship. 

2. Respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. 

3. Cooperative defense between Japan and China. 

Cooperation between Japan and China for the purposes of preventing 
communistic and other subversive activities which may constitute a 
menace to the security of both countries and of maintaining the public 
order in China. 

Stationing of Japanese troops and naval forces in certain areas in the 
Chinese territory for a necessary period for the purposes referred to 
above and in accordance with the existing agreements and usages. 

4. Withdrawal of Japanese armed forces. 

The Japanese armed forces which have been dispatched to China for 
carrying out the China Affairs will be withdrawn from China upon the 
settlement of the said Affairs, excepting those troops which come under 
point 3. 

5. Economic cooperation. 

(a) There shall be economic cooperation between Japan and China, having 
the development and utilization of essential materials for national 
defense in China as its principal objective. 

(b) The preceding paragraph does not mean to restrict any economic 
activities by third Powers in China so long as they are pursued on an 
equitable basis. 

6. Fusion of the Chiang Kai-shek regime and the Wang Ching-wei 
Government. 

7 No annexation. 

8 No indemnities. 

9. Recognition of Manchoukuo. (Ex. 29, Vol. II, p. 633)

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK      457

ANNEX D

Japanese Proposals Submitted to Secretary Hull on September 27

(Washington time)

The Governments of Japan and of the United States accent joint 
responsibility for the initiation and conclusion of a general agreement 
of understanding as expressed in a joint declaration for the resumption 
of traditional friendly relations. 

Without reference to specific causes of recent estrangement, it is the 
sincere desire of both Governments that the incidents which led to the 
deterioration of the amicable sentiment between their countries should 
be prevented from recurrence and corrected in their unforeseen and 
unfortunate consequences. 

It is the earnest hope of both Governments that, by a cooperative 
effort, Japan and the United States may contribute effectively toward 
the establishment and preservation of peace in the Pacific area and, by 
the rapid consummation of an amicable understanding, encourage world 
peace and arrest, if not dispel, the tragic confusion that now threatens 
to engulf civilization. 

For such decisive action, protracted negotiations would seem ill-suited 
and weakening. Both Governments, therefore, desire that adequate 
instrumentalities should be developed for the realization of a general 
understanding which would bind, meanwhile, both Governments in honor and 
in act. 

It is the belief of both Governments that such an understanding should 
comprise only the pivotal issues of urgency and not the accessory 
concerns which could be deliberated later at a conference. 

Both Governments presume to anticipate that they could achieve 
harmonious relations if certain situations and attitudes were clarified 
or improved; to wit: 

1. The concepts of Japan and of the United States respecting 
international relations and the character of nations. 

2. The attitudes of both Governments toward the European War. 

3. Action toward a peaceful settlement between Japan and China. 

4. Commerce between both nations. 

5. Economic problems in the Southwestern Pacific area. 

6. The policies of both nations affecting political stabilization in the 
Pacific area. 

Accordingly, the Government of Japan and the Government of the United 
States have come to the following mutual understanding and declaration 
of policy: 

I. The concepts of Japan and of the United States respecting 
international relations and the character of nations. 

Both Governments affirm that their national policies are directed toward 
the foundation of a lasting peace and the inauguration of a

458             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

new era of reciprocal confidence and cooperation between the peoples of 
both countries. 

Both Governments declare that it is their traditional, and present, 
concept and conviction that nations and races compose, as members of a 
family, one household living under the ideal of universal concord 
through justice and equity; each equally enjoying rights and admitting a 
responsibilities with a mutuality of interests regulated by peaceful 
processes and directed to the pursuit of their moral and physical 
welfare, which they are bound to defend for themselves as they are bound 
not to destroy for others; they further admit their responsibilities to 
oppose the oppression or exploitation of other peoples. 

Both Governments are firmly determined that their respective traditional 
concepts on the character of nations and the underlying moral principles 
of social order and national life will continue to be preserved and 
never transformed by foreign ideas or ideologies contrary to those moral 
principles and concepts. 

II. The attitudes of both Governments toward the European War. 

Both Governments maintain it their common aim to bring about peace in 
the world, and, when an opportune time arrives, they will endeavor 
jointly for the early restoration of world peace 

With regard to developments of the situation prior to the restoration of 
world peace, both Governments will be guided in their conduct by 
considerations of protection and self-defense; and, in case the United 
States should participate in the European War, Japan would decide 
entirely independently in the matter of interpretation of the Tripartite 
Pact between Japan, Germany and Italy, and would likewise determine what 
actions might be taken by way of fulfilling the obligations in 
accordance with the said interpretation. 

III. Action toward a peaceful settlement between Japan and China. 

Both Governments, taking cognizance of the fact that the settlement of 
the China Affair has a vital bearing upon the peace of the entire 
Pacific area and consequently upon that of the world, will endeavor to 
expedite a rapid realization of the settlement of the said Affair. 

The Government of the United States, recognizing the effort and the 
sincere desire on the part of the Japanese Government concerning the 
peaceful settlement of the China Affair, will, with the intention of 
facilitating the realization of the settlement, render its good offices 
in order that the Chungking Government may promptly enter into 
negotiations with the Government of Japan for a termination of 
hostilities and a resumption of peaceful relations, and will refrain 
from resorting to any measures and actions which might hamper the 
measures and efforts of the Government of Japan directed toward the 
settlement of the China Affair. 

The Government of Japan maintains that the basic general terms of peace 
for the settlement of the China Affair will be in harmony with the 
principles embodied in the Konoye statement, and those agreements 
between Japan and China and those matters which have been put into 
effect in accordance with the said statement; that the economic 
cooperation between Japan and China will be carried on by peaceful means 
and in conformity with the principle of non-discrimination in the 
international commercial relations and also with 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         459

the principle of especially close relationship which is natural between 
neighboring countries; and that the economic activities of third Powers 
in China will not be excluded so long as they are pursued on an 
equitable basis. 

NOTE: There is appended a draft of the basic terms of peace between 
Japan and China. 

IV. Commerce between Japan and the United States. 

Both Governments agree to take without delay measures necessary for 
resuming normal trade relations between the two countries. 

Both Governments guarantee each other that they will, as the first of 
the measures envisaged in the preceding paragraph, discontinue 
immediately the measures of freezing assets now being enforced, and that 
they will supply mutually such commodities as are, respectively, 
available and required by either of them. 

V. Economic problems in the Southwestern Pacific area. 

Both Governments mutually pledge themselves that the economic activities 
of Japan and the United States in the Southwestern Pacific area shall be 
carried on by peaceful means and in conformity with the principle of 
non-discrimination in the international commercial relations in 
pursuance of the policy stated in the preceding paragraph, both 
Governments agree to cooperate each with the other towards the creation 
of conditions of international trade and international investment under 
which both countries will have a reasonable opportunity to secure 
through the trade process the means of acquiring those goods and 
commodities which each country needs for the safeguarding and 
development of its own economy. 

Both Governments will amicably cooperate for the conclusion and 
execution of agreements with the Powers concerned in regard to the 
production and supply, on the basis of non-discrimination, of such 
specific commodities as oil, rubber, nickel, and tin. 

VI. The policies of both nations affecting political stabilization in 
the Pacific area. 

Both Governments, taking cognizance of the fact that it is a matter of 
vital importance to stabilize promptly the situation in the Southwestern 
Pacific area, undertake not to resort to any measures and actions which 
may jeopardize such stabilization. The Government of Japan will not make 
any armed advancement, using French Indochina as a base, to any adjacent 
area thereof (excluding China), and upon the establishment of an 
equitable peace in the Pacific area, will withdraw its troops which are 
now stationed in French Indochina. 

The Government of the United States will alleviate its military measures 
in the Southwestern Pacific area. 

Both Governments declare that they respect the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of Thailand and Netherland East Indies, and that 
they are prepared to conclude an agreement concerning the neutralization 
of the Philippine Islands when its independence will have been achieved. 

The Government of the United States guarantees non-discriminatory 
treatment of the Japanese nationals in the Philippine Islands. 

[Here follows text of basic terms of peace between Japan and China set 
forth in Annex C above.] 

(Ex. 29, Vol. II, pp. 637-640.) 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK       460

ANNEX E

(TEXT OF JAPANESE GOVERNMENTS REPLY TO UNITED STATES NOTE OF NOVEMBER 
26, 1941, AS INTERCEPTED AND DECODED IN WASHINGTON PRIOR TO DELIVERY TO 
SECRETARY HULL BY THE JAPANESE AMBASSADORS)

(Part 1 of 14)

MEMORANDUM

1. The Government of Japan, prompted by a genuine desire to come to an 
amicable understanding with the Government of the United States in order 
that the two countries by their joint efforts may secure the peace of 
the Pacific area and thereby contribute toward the realization of world 
peace, has continued negotiations with the utmost sincerity since April 
last with the Government of the United States regarding the adjustment 
and advancement of Japanese-American relations and the stabilization of 
the Pacific area. 

The Japanese Government has the honor to state frankly its views, 
concerning the claims the American Government has persistently 
maintained as well as the measures the United States and Great Britain 
have taken toward Japan during these eight months. 

2. It is the immutable policy of the Japanese Government to insure the 
stability of East Asia and to promote world peace, and thereby to enable 
all nations to find each its proper place in the world. 

Ever since the China Affair broke out owing to the failure on the part 
of China to comprehend Japan's true intentions, the Japanese Government 
has striven for the restoration of peace and it has consistently exerted 
its best efforts to prevent the extension of war-like disturbances. It 
was also to that end that in September last year Japan concluded the Tri 
Partite Pact with Germany and Italy. 

(Part 2 of 14)

However, both the United States and Great Britain have resorted to every 
possible measure to assist the Chungking regime so as to obstruct the 
establishment of a general peace between Japan and China, interfering 
with Japan's constructive endeavours toward the stabilization of East 
Asia, exerting pressure on The Netherlands East Indies, or menacing 
French Indo-China, they have attempted to frustrate Japan's aspiration 
to realize the ideal of common prosperity in cooperation with these 
regions. Furthermore, when Japan in accordance with its protocol with 
France took measures of joint defense of French Indo-China, both 
American and British governments, willfully misinterpreted it as a 
threat to their own possession and inducing the Netherlands government 
to follow suit, they enforced the assets freezing order, thus severing 
economic relations with Japan. While manifesting thus an obviously 
hostile attitude, these countries 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         461

have strengthened their military preparations perfecting an encirclement 
of Japan, and have brought about a situation which endangers the very 
existence of the empire. 

(Part 3 of 14)

Nevertheless, facilitate a speedy settlement, the Premier of Japan 
proposed, in August last, to meet the President of the United States for 
a discussion of important problems between the two countries covering 
the entire Pacific area. However, while accepting in principle the 
Japanese proposal, insisted that the meeting should take place after an 
agreement of view had been reached on fundamental -(75 letters garbled)-
The Japanese government submitted a proposal based on the formula 
proposed by the American government, taking fully into consideration 
past American claims and also incorporating Japanese views. Repeated 
discussions proved of no avail in producing readily an agreement of 
view. The present cabinet, therefore, submitted a revised proposal, 
moderating still further the Japanese claims regarding the principal 
points of difficulty in the negotiation and endeavoured strenuously to 
reach a settlement. But the American government, adhering steadfastly to 
its original proposal failed to display in the slightest degree a spirit 
of conciliation. The negotiation made no progress. 

(Part 4 of 14)

Thereupon, the Japanese Government, with a view to doing its utmost for 
averting a crisis in Japanese-American relations, submitted on November 
20th still another proposal in order to arrive at an equitable solution 
of the more essential and urgent questions which, simplifying its 
previous proposal, stipulated the following points: 

(1) The Governments of Japan and the United States undertake not to 
dispatch armed forces into any of the regions, excepting French Indo-
China, in the Southeastern Asia and the Southern Pacific area. 

(2) Both Governments shall cooperate with a view to securing the 
acquisition in the Netherlands East Indies of those goods and 
commodities of which the two countries are in need. 

(3) Both Governments mutually undertake to restore commercial relations 
to those prevailing prior to the freezing of assets. 

The Government of the United States shall supply Japan the required 
quantity of oil. 

(4) The Government of the United States undertakes not to resort to 
measures and actions prejudicial to the endeavours for the restoration 
of general peace between Japan and China. 

(5) The Japanese Government undertakes to withdraw troops now stationed 
in French Indo-China upon either the restoration of peace between Japan 
and China or the establishment of an equitable peace in the Pacific 
area; and it is prepared to remove the Japanese troops in the southern 
part of French Indo-China to the northern part upon the conclusion of 
the present agreement. 

462             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

(Part 5 of 14)

As regards China, the Japanese Government, while expressing its 
readiness to accept the offer of the President of the United States to 
act as "Introducer" of peace between Japan and China as was previously 
suggested, asked for an undertaking on the part of the United States to 
do nothing prejudicial to the restoration of Sino-Japanese peace when 
the two parties have commenced direct negotiations. 

The American government not only rejected the above-mentioned new 
proposal, but made known its intention to continue its aid to Chiang 
Kai-shek; and in spite of its suggestion mentioned above, withdrew the 
offer of the President to act as the so called "Introducer" of peace 
between Japan and China, pleading that time was not yet ripe for it. 
Finally, on November 26th, in an attitude to impose upon the Japanese 
government those principles it has persistently maintained, the American 
government made a proposal totally ignoring Japanese claims, which is a 
source of profound regret to the Japanese Government. 

(Part 6 of 14)

4. From the beginning of the present negotiation the Japanese Government 
has always maintained an attitude of fairness and moderation, and did 
its best to reach a settlement, for which it made all possible 
concessions often in spite of great difficulties. 

As for the China question which constituted an important subject of the 
negotiation, the Japanese Government showed a most conciliatory 
attitude. 

As for the principle of Non-Discrimination in International Commerce, 
advocated by the American Government, the Japanese Government expressed 
its desire to see the said principle applied throughout the world, and 
declared that along with the actual Practice of this principle in the 
world, the Japanese Government would endeavor to apply the same in the 
Pacific area, including China, and made it clear that Japan had no 
intention of excluding from China economic activities of third powers 
pursued on an equitable basis. 

Furthermore, as regards the question of withdrawing troops from French 
Indo-China, the Japanese government even volunteered, as mentioned 
above, to carry out an immediate evacuation of troops from Southern 
French Indo-China as a measure of easing the situation. 

(Part 7 of 14)

It is presumed that the spirit of conciliation exhibited to the utmost 
degree by the Japanese Government in all these matters is fully 
appreciated by the American government. 

On the other hand, the American government, always holding fast to 
theories in disregard of realities, and refusing to yield an inch on its 
impractical principles, caused undue delays in the negotiation. It is 
difficult to understand this attitude of the American government and the 
Japanese government desires to call the attention of the American 
government especially to the following points: 

1. The American government advocates in the name of world peace those 
principles favorable to it and urges upon the Japanese government the 
acceptance thereof. The peace of the world may be brought 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK         463

about only by discovering a mutually acceptable formula through 
recognition of the reality of the situation and mutual appreciation of 
one another's position. An attitude such as ignores realities and 
imposes one's selfish views upon others will scarcely serve the purpose 
of facilitating the consummation of negotiations. 

(Part 8 of 14) 

Of the various principles put forward by the American government as a 
basis of the Japanese-American agreement, there are some which the 
Japanese government is ready to accept in principle, but in view of the 
world's actual conditions, it seems only a Utopian ideal, on the part of 
the American government, to attempt to force their immediate adoption. 

Again, the proposal to conclude a multilateral non-aggression pact 
between Japan, the United States, Great Britain, China, the Soviet 
Union, The Netherlands, and Thailand, which is patterned after the old 
concept of collective security, is far removed from the realities of 
East Asia. 

The American proposal contains a stipulation which states: "Both 
governments will agree that no agreement, which either has concluded 
with any third powers, shall be interpreted by it in such a way as to 
conflict with the fundamental purpose of this agreement, the 
establishment and preservation of peace throughout the Pacific area." It 
is presumed that the above provision has been proposed with a view to 
restrain Japan from fulfilling its obligations under the Tripartite Pact 
when the United States participates in the war in Europe, and, as such, 
it cannot be accepted by the Japanese Government. 

(Part 9 of 14)

The American Government, obsessed with its own views and opinions, may 
be said to be scheming for the extension of the war. While it seeks, on 
the one hand, to secure its rear by stabilizing the Pacific area, it is 
engaged. On the other hand, in aiding Great Britain and preparing to 
attack, in the name of self-defense, Germany and Italy, two powers that 
are striving to establish a new order in Europe. Such a policy is 
totally at variance with the many principles upon which the American 
Government proposes to found the stability of the Pacific area through 
peaceful means. 

3. Where as the American Government, under the principles it rigidly 
upholds, objects to settling international issues through military 
pressure, it is exercising in conjunction with Great Britain and other 
nations pressure by economic power. Recourse to such pressure as a means 
of dealing with international relations should be condemned as it is at 
times more inhuman than military pressure. 

(Part 10 of 14)

4. It is impossible not to reach the conclusion that the American 
Government desires to maintain and strengthen, in collusion with Great 
Britain and other powers, its dominant position it has hitherto occupied 
not only in China but in other areas of East Asia. It is a 

464             PEARL HARBOR ATTACK

fact of history that one countr-(45 letters garbled or missing)- been 
compelled to observe the status quo under the Anglo-American policy of 
imperialistic exploitation and to sacrifice the -es to the prosperity of 
the two nations. The Japanese Government cannot tolerate the 
perpetuation of such a situation since it directly runs counter to 
Japan's fundamental policy to enable all nations to enjoy each its 
proper place in the world.

(Part 11 of 14)

The stipulation proposed by the American Government relative to French 
Indo-China is a good exemplification of the above-mentioned American 
policy. That the six countries,-Japan, the United States, Great Britain, 
The Netherlands, China and Thailand,-excepting France, should undertake 
among themselves to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
French Indo-China and equality of treatment in trade and commerce would 
be tantamount to placing that territory under the joint guarantee of the 
governments of those six countries. Apart from the fact that such a 
proposal totally ignores the position of France, it is unacceptable to 
the Japanese government in that such an arrangement cannot but be 
considered as an extension to French Indo-China of a system similar to 
the n-(50 letters missed)-sible for the present predicament of East 
Asia. 

(Part 12 of 14)

5. All the items demanded of Japan by the American government regarding 
China such as wholesale evacuation of troops or unconditional 
application of the principle of Non-Discrimination in International 
Commerce ignore the actual conditions of China, and are calculated to 
destroy Japan's position as the stabilizing factor of East Asia. The 
attitude of the American government in demanding Japan not to support 
militarily, politically or economically any regime other than the regime 
at Chunking, disregarding thereby the existence of the Nanking 
government, shatters the very basis of the present negotiation. This 
demand of the American government falling, as it does, in line with its 
above-mentioned refusal to cease from aiding the Chunking regime, 
demonstrates clearly the intention of the American government to 
obstruct the restoration of normal relations between Japan and China and 
the return of peace to East Asia. 

(Part 13 of 14)

5. In brief, the American proposal contains certain acceptable items 
such as those concerning commerce, including the conclusion of a trade 
agreement, mutual removal of the freezing restrictions, and 
stabilization of the Yen and Dollar exchange, or the abolition of 
extraterritorial rights in China. On the other hand, however, the 
proposal in question ignores Japan's sacrifices in the four years of the 
China Affair, menaces the empire's existence itself and disparages its 
honour and prestige. Therefore, viewed in its entirety, the Japanese 
government regrets that it cannot accept the proposal as a basis of 
negotiation. 

PEARL HARBOR ATTACK            465

6. The Japanese government, in its desire for an early conclusion of the 
negotiation, proposed that simultaneously with the conclusion of the 
Japanese-American negotiation, agreements be signed, with Great Britain 
and other interested countries. The proposal was accepted by the 
American government. However, since the American government has made the 
proposal of November 26th as a result of frequent consultations with 
Great Britain, Australia, The Netherlands and Chunking, ANDND* 
presumably by catering to the wishes of the Chungking regime on the 
questions of CHTUAL YLOKMMTT** be concluded that. All these countries 
are at one with the United States in ignoring Japan's position. 

(Part 14 of 14)

7. Obviously it is the intention of the American Government to conspire 
with Great Britain and other countries to obstruct Japan's efforts 
toward the establishment of peace through the creation of a New Order in 
East Asia, and especially to preserve Anglo-American rights and 
interests by keeping Japan and China at war. This intention has been 
revealed clearly during the course of the present negotiations. Thus, 
the earnest hope of the Japanese Government to adjust Japanese-American 
relations and to preserve and promote the peace of the Pacific through 
cooperation with the American Government has finally been lost. 

The Japanese Government regrets to have to notify hereby the American 
Government that in view of the attitude of the American Government it 
cannot but consider that it is impossible to reach an agreement through 
further negotiations.

(Ex. 1, pp. 239-245)

* * *

Page maintained by Larry W. Jewell, lwjewell@omni.cc.purdue.edu. Created: 12/5/96 Updated: 12/5/96
