# Call to Make COVID-19 Data/Research Publicly Available

March 13 , 2020 

To Members of the Scholarly Publishing Community: 

National Science and Technology Advi sors from a dozen countries have been holding regular calls on the 

COVID -19 response s. A topic of considerable interest and discussion is enhancing the ability of 

researchers and other stakeholders to access and re -use or text -mine all published articles on 

coronaviruses , SARS -CoV -2, and COVID -19. This timely access is critical, a s it allows researchers to 

keep up with the rapidly growing body of literature and identify trends and relevant information in efforts 

to characterize t his novel virus and address the associated global health crisis. We support the January 30 

statement of the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board on COVID -19 that called on countries, 

institutions, communities and partners to ensure that all relevant information about the outbreak is shared 

openly and rapidly. 

We, as national leaders on science policy, applaud the efforts of researchers to understand and prevent the 

infection and spread of COVID -19. We also greatly appreciate the funders and publishers who play the 

important role of supporting, reviewing, and co mmunicating research outcomes and making publications 

and data available to the global community for scientific research and public awareness. 

To assist efforts to contain and mitigate the rapidly evolving COVID -19 pandemic , basic science research 

and i nnovation will be vital to addressing this global crisis . Given the urgency of the situation, it is 

particularly importan t that scientists and the public can access research outcomes as soon as possible .

The countries listed below urge publishers to volun tarily agree to make their COVID -19 and coronavirus -

related publications, and the available data supporting them, immediately accessible in PubMed Central 

and other appropriate public repositories , such as the World Health Organization’s COVID data base, t o

support the ongoing public health emergency response efforts .

Importantly, this information should be in both human and machine -readable format to allow for full text 

and data mining using artificial intelligence with rights accorded for research re -us e and secondary 

analysis. We further respectfully request th is arrangement apply to articles published to date as well as 

future articles for the duration of this crisis. 

A prompt response from the scientific and publishing community will accelerate glob al efforts to contain 

the SARS -CoV -2 virus and thus save lives and reduce societal disruption. Efforts made by publishers to 

date to make publications and data on COVID -19 publicly accessible are greatly appreciated. 

Sent on behalf of the chief science a dvisor or equivalent representing the following countries: 

Australia 

Brazil 

Canada 

Germany 

India 

Italy 

Japan 

New Zealand 

Republic of Korea 

Singapore 

United Kingdom 

United States of America
