# Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the EU/EEA and the UK – eighth update

Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) pandemic: 

increased transmission in the EU/EEA and the UK – sixth update – 12 March 2020 . Stockholm: ECDC; 2020. 

© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2020. 

# RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT 

# Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) 

# pandemic : increased transmission 

# in the EU/EEA and the UK – sixth update 

# 12 March  20 20 

# Summary 

On 31 December 2019, a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown aetiology was report ed in Wuhan, Hubei 

Province, China. On 9 January 2020,  China CDC  reported a novel coronavirus as the causative agent of this 

outbreak, which is phylogenetically in the SARS -CoV clade. The disease associated  with the virus  is referred to 

as novel coronaviru s disease 2019 (COVID -19). 

As of  11  March 2020,  11 8 598  cases of COVID -19  were  reported worldwide  by more than 100  countries . Since 

late February , the majority of cases  reported are  from outside China,  with  an increasing majority of  these 

reported from EU/ EEA countries  and the UK .

The Director General of the World Health Organization declared COVID -19 a global pandemic on 11 March 

2020. 

All EU/EEA  countries  and the UK are affected, reporting a total of  17 413  cases  as of 11 March . Seven  hundred 

and  eleven  cases reported by EU/EEA countries  and the UK  have die d. Italy represents  58 % of the cases 

(n= 10 149 ) and  88% of the fatalities (n= 631 ). The current pace of the increase in cases in the EU/EEA  and 

the UK  mirrors trends seen in China in January -early Februa ry and trends seen in Italy in mid -February. 

In the current situation where COVID -19 is rapidly spreading worldwide and the number of cases in Europe is 

rising with increasing pace in several affected areas, there is  a need for immediate targeted action.  The speed 

with which COVID -19 can cause nationally incapacitating epidemics  once transmission within the community is 

established , indicates that  in a few weeks or even days,  it is likely that  similar situations  to those seen in China 

and Italy  may be seen  in other EU/EEA  countries or the UK .

There are no vaccines available  and there is little evidence on the effectiveness of potential therapeutic agents. 

In addition,  there is presumably no pre -existing immunity in the population  against the new coronavirus  and 

everyone in the population is assumed to be susceptible . Clinical presentations  of COVID -19 range from no 

symptoms (asymptomatic) to severe pneumonia ; severe disease  can lead to death. While the majority of cases 

(80%) are mild er respiratory infection s and pneumonias , severe illness and death  is more common  among the 

elderly with other chronic underlying conditions , with these risk groups accounting for the majority of severe 

disease and fatalities to date .

The risk  of severe disease  associated with C OVID -19 infection for people in the EU/EEA and UK is currently 

considered moderate for the general population and high for older  adults and individuals with chronic 

underlying conditions , based on the probability of  community transmission  and the impact of  the disease. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

2

The risk of healthcare system capacity being exceeded in the EU/EEA and the UK in the coming weeks is 

considered  high . The impact and risk assessment  on health system capacity  can be  mediated by the 

application of effective infection prevent ion  and control and surge capacity  measures .

The risk of transmission of COVID -19 in health and social institutions with large vulnerable populations is 

considered  high.  The impact  of  transmission in health and social institutions can be mediated by the 

application of effect ive infection prevention and control and surge capacity .

The EU/EEA and the UK are quickly moving toward a scenario of sustained community transmission of COVID -

19. The situation is evolving  very quickly  and a  rapid,  proactive  and compr ehensive  approach is  essential  in 

order  to delay transmission, as  containing  transmission  to local epidemics  is no longer considered feasible.  A

rapid  shift  from a containment to a mitigation  approach  is required , as  the  rapid  increase  in cases , that is 

an ticipated  in the coming days to few weeks  may not  provide  decision  makers and hospitals enough time to 

realise, accept and adapt their response accordingly  if not implemented ahead of  time . Measures taken at this 

stage should ultimately aim at protecting t he most vulnerable population groups from severe illness and fatal 

outcome by reducing transmission and reinforcing healthcare systems. 

Given the current epidemiology and risk assessment , and the expected developments in the next days to few 

weeks , the fo llowing  public health measures to mitigate  the impact of the  pandemic  are  necessary  in  EU/EEA 

countries :

 Social distancing measures should be implemented  early  in order to mitigate the impact of the epidemic 

and to delay the epidemic peak . This can interr upt human -to -human transmission chains, prevent 

further spread, reduce the intensity of the epidemic and slow down the increase in cases , while 

allowing healthcare systems to prepare and cope with an increased influx of patients. 

Such measure s should incl ude: 

 the  immediate  isolation of  symptomatic  persons  suspected or confirmed to be infected with 

COVID -19; 

 the suspension of  mass  gatherings,  taking into consideration the size of the event, the density of 

participants and if the event is in a confined  indoo r environment ;

 social distancing measures at  workplaces  (for example teleworking, suspension of meetings, 

cancellation of non -essential travel) ;

 measures in and  closure of schools , taking into consideration the uncertainty in the evidence of 

children in t ransmitting the disease, need for day care for children, impact on nursing staff, 

potential to increase transmission to vulnerable grandparents; 

 cordon sanitaire of  residential  areas with high levels of community transmission. 

 Ensuring the public is aware  of the seriousness of COVID -19. A high degree of population 

understanding, solidarity and discipline  is  required to apply strict personal hygiene, coughing etiquette, 

self -monitoring and social distancing measures. Community engagement and acceptance of s tringent 

social distancing measures put in place are key in delaying and reducing further spread. 

 Prevention and control of COVID -19 in hospitals and  long -term care facilitie s is  an immediate priority  in 

order to: (1) slow the demand for specialised health care, such as ICU beds; (2) safeguard populations 

vulnerable to severe outcomes of infection (3); protect healthcare workers that  provide care; (4) 

minimise the export of cases to other healthcare facilities and the community. 

 Every healthcare facility sh ould initiate training for  all staff and  those who may be required for 

healthcare provision during surge capacity . Countries should identify  healthcare units that can be 

designated to care for COVID -19 cases, to minimise  transmission to non -cases and to co nserve PPE .

Countries and healthcare institutions should identify additional facilities that can be used for the 

cohorting of cases with mild symptoms, in the event that surge capacity is exceeded by healthcare 

facilities. The highest priority for use of r espirators (FFP2/3)  are  healthcare workers, in particular those 

performing aerosol -generating procedures , including swabbing. 

 If resources or capacity are limited, ratio nal approach es should be implemented  to prioritis e high -yield 

actions , which include:  rational use of  confirmatory testing, reduc ing  contact tracing to focus only on 

high -yield contacts, rational use of  PPE and  hospitalisation and  implementing rational  criteria for de -

isolation . Testing approaches  should prioritise vulnerable populations, pr otection of social  and 

healthcare institutions, including staff. 

 National surveillance systems should initially aim at rapidly detecting  cases  and assessing community 

transmission. As the epidemic progresses, surveillance should monitor the intensity, geo graphical 

spread and the impact  of the epidemic  on the population and healthcare systems and  assess the 

effectiveness of  measures  in place. In circumstances with capacity shortages and strict implementation 

of social distancing measures,  surveillance  shoul d focus on severe acute respiratory infections , sent inel 

surveillance in outpatient  clinics  or  collection of data through telephone helplines. 

A strategic approach based on  early and  rigorous application of these measures will  help reduce the burden 

and pr essure on the healthcare system , and in particular on hospitals , and will  allow more time for the testing 

of therapeutics and vaccine development. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

3

# What is new in this update? 

 Updated  data on the epidemiological situation in the EU/EEA  and the UK 

 Recent f indings on disease and transmissibility , including during the asymptomatic period 

 Risk associated with COVID -19 for pe ople from the EU/EEA and the UK 

 Risk of  local and  widespread  national community  transmission  in the EU/EEA and UK in the coming 

weeks 

 Risk  to healthcare systems  capacity being exceeded  in the EU/EEA and the UK  in the coming weeks 

 Risk of transmission of COVID -19 in health and social institutions with large vulnerable populations 

 Options for preparedness and response  focused on the mitigation  phase , including rational measures in 

case of resource constraints or shortages 

 Updated s urveillance objectives and methods for the mitigation phase 

Regularly updated information on severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus COVID -19 outbreak is avail able on  ECDC’s 

website  [1] , the European Commission  website  [2] , and the World Health Organization’s (WHO)  website  [3] .

This risk assessment is based on published information available as of 12 March 2020. 

# 1 Event background 

For more detailed event background information, please visit ECDC’s  website  [4] .

Since ECDC’s f ifth  update on novel coronavirus published on 2 March 2020  and as of  11 March , the  number of cases  and 

deaths reported  in the EU/EEA  has been  rising, mirroring the trends seen in China in January -early February  and  in northern 

Italy in late Fe bruary.  If this trend continues, based on the quick pace of growth of the epidemic observed in China and 

northern Italy, it is likely that  in  days, or a small number of weeks, similar situations  may  be seen in other EU/EEA Member 

States .

The m ain developm ents since the 2 March 2020 risk assessment can be summarised as follows: 

 All EU/EEA countries are now affected and more than 100 countries are affected worldwide .

 In the EU/EEA and the UK, 1 7 413 cases ha d been reported as of 1 1 March. Seven hundred and eleven cases 

reported by EU/EEA countries have died as of 1 1 March. Italy represents 58% of the cases (n=10 149) and 88% of 

the fatalities (n=631). 

 The 14 -day cumulative notification rate of COVID -19, a measure of the prevalence of active cases in the pop ulation, is 

3.28 per 100 000 population in the EU/EEA as of 11 March, ranging from low rates of <0.1 to 16.3 per 100 000 in 

Italy and 19.8 per 100 000 in Iceland. The 14 -days notification rate increased 10 -fold over the last 10 days and, 

assuming no effect of mitigation measures, the EU/EEA and UK is predicted to reach 100 per 100 000 population (the 

Hubei scenario) by the end of March .

 While early in the outbreak most cases were reported in China, currently the majority of cases reported are from 

outside C hina; and since 2 March , 51 % of the cases reported were from EU/EEA countries and the UK. 

 There are increasing reports both globally and in the EU/EEA that local transmission has occurred extensively in 

multiple locations, without reported travel history to areas reporting community transmission and without 

epidemiological links to known cases [5 -8] .

 As of 11 March 2020, among the 1 597 cases reported in TESSy where the place of infection was reported, 797 

(50 %) we re reported to be infected in the reporting country, 698 (44%) were reported to have acquired infection in 

another European country and 102 (6%) had acquired infection outside the EU/EEA. 

 In the EU /EEA and the UK , events and locations that involve social i nteraction or institutional contact have been 

related to the development of COVID -19 clusters, including workplace interactions, religious events, festivities, health 

and social care settings, and travel. 

 Transmission events have been reported in hospitals , with COVID -19 cases identified among healthcare workers and 

patients [9,10] as well as in long -term care facilities . As of 9 March, a n ongoing outbreak of COVID -19 a t a long -term 

care facility ( LTCF ) with 120 residents in Washington State (United States) has had 54 residents transferred to local 

hospitals and 26 deaths, of which 11 were within the facility. Of the 15 that died in hospital, 13 had tested positive for 

COVID -19. Additionally, 70 of 180 LTCF employees reported symptoms compatible with COVID -19 [11] . In a LTCF in 

Île -de -France region , France , as of 10 March, authorities report an outbreak of five cases among residents, including 

two deaths [12] .

 Reports from some healthcare facilities in northern Italy indicat e that intensive care capacity has been exceeded due 

to the high volume of patients requiring ventilation [13] .

 The Director General of the World Health Organization declared COVID -19 a global pandemic on 11 March 2020. 

For the most recent information on the current  epidemiological  situation  regarding COVID -19, please visit this  page  [14] .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

4

# 2 Disease background 

For information on COVID -19, please visit this  page  [1 5] on ECDC’s website. 

# Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) 

In December 2019, a novel coronavirus (COVID -19) was detected in three patients with  pneumonia  connected to the cluster 

of acute respiratory illness cases from Wuhan, China. By the end of February 2020, several countries were experiencing 

sustained local transmission, including in Europe. 

Symptoms, incubation period, severity : The most commonly reported clinical symptom in laboratory -confirmed cases is 

fever (88% ), followed by dry cough (68%) , fatigue (38%), sputum production (33%), dyspnoea (19%), sore throat (14%), 

headache (14%) and myalgia or arthralgia (15%) [16] . Less common sym ptoms are diarrhoea (4%) and vomiting (5%) .

About 80% of reported case s in China ha d mild to moderate disease (including non -pneumonia and pneumonia cases), 

13.8% ha d severe disease and 6.1% we re critical (respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multipl e organ 

dysfunction/failure). Current estimates suggest a median incubation period from five to six days for COVID -19, with a range 

from one to up to 14 days. A recent modelling study confirmed that it remains prudent to consider the incubation period of 

at least 14 days [17,18] .

Case fatality : Robust estimates for final case fatality risk for COVID -19 are still lacking and biased due to incomplete 

outcome data and the fact that initial detections were of mostly severe cases in most settings. Based on a large dataset from 

cases in China, the overall case fatality risk (CFR) among laboratory -confirmed cases was higher in the early stages of the 

outbreak (17.3% for cases with sympt om onset from 1 -10 January) and has reduced over time to 0.7% for patients with 

symptom onset after 1 February [16] . In data on diagnosed COVID -19 cases in China, Italy and South Korea, overall CFR 

was 2.3%, 2.8% and 0.5%, respectively, and increased with age in all settings , with the highest CRF among people over 80 

years of age ( 14.8%, 8.2% and 3.7 %, respectively ) [19 -21] .

Viral shedding:  Over the course of the infection,  the  virus  has been  identified  in  respiratory  tract specimens  1-2 days 

before the onset of symptoms  and  it can  persist for 7 -12 days in moderate cases and up to 2 weeks in severe cases  [22] . In 

faeces , viral RNA has been detected from day 5 after onset and up to 4 to  5 weeks in moderate cases . The virus has been 

detected also in whole blood  [23] , serum  [24,25]  saliva  [26]  and urine  [27] . Prolonged  viral RNA  shedding has been reported 

from  nasopharyngeal swab s,  up to  37  days  among  adult patient s [28]  and  in  faeces, for more than one month  after infection 

in  paediatric  patient s [29] . It should be noted that viral  RNA  shedding doe s not  directly equate with infectivity. 

Basic reproduction number  (R0):  The current estimates of  the  basic reproductive number  R0 are between  2 and  3 in 

settings from China  [17,30,31]  and during  the  early stage o f an outbreak on a cruise ship  [32] .

Infection in asymptomatic individuals : The virus has been detected in asymptomatic persons . On a rapidly evolving 

cruise ship outbreak, where most of the passengers and staff were tested irrespective of symptoms, 51% of the laboratory 

confirmed cases were asymptomatic at the time of confirmation [33] . In Italy, 44% of the laboratory -confirmed cases have 

been asymptomatic [34] . In Japan , 0.06% of reported cases have been asymptomatic [35] . These proportions based on 

nationally notified cases likely reflect laboratory testing algorithms rather than true estima tes of asymptomatic infections. 

Based on Chinese data, the international WHO mission report indicates that up to 75% of initially asymptomatic cases will 

progress to clinical disease, making the true asymptomatic infection rather rare (estimated at 1 -3%) [16] .

Both viral RNA and infectious virus particles were detected in throat swabs from two German citizens evacuated from Hubei 

province on 1 February 2020 , who remained well and afebrile seven days after admission to a hospital in Frankfurt [36] . Both 

a mother and a child in a family cluster remained asymptomatic (including normal chest CT images during the observation 

period) with qRT -PCR positive nasopharyngeal swab samples [37] . Similar viral load in asymptomatic versus symptomatic 

cases was reported in a study including 18 patients [38] . Persistent positivity of vir al RNA in throat and anal swabs were 

reported in a asymptomatic female patient after 17 days of clinical observation and treatment [39] .

Potential transmission from an asymptomatic person has been reported in a familial cluster of five COVID -19 patients 

hospitalised with fever and respiratory symptoms that had contact before their onset of symptoms with an asymptomatic 

family member, a young 20 -year -old woman, upon her return from Wuhan [40] . She remained asymptomatic for the whole 

duration of laboratory and clinical monitoring (19 da ys). 

Transmission in pre -symptomatic stage of infection: In addition to case reports, pre -symptomatic transmission has 

been inferred through modelling , and the proportion of pre -symptomatic transmission was estimated to be around 48% and 

62% [41] . Pre -symptomatic transmission was deemed likely based on a shorter serial interval of COVID -19 (4.0 to 4.6 days) 

than the mean incubation period (five days) with the authors indicating t hat many secondary transmissions would have 

already occurred at the time when symptomatic cases are detected and isolated [42] . Major uncertainties remain in 

assessing the influence of pre -symptomatic transmission o n the overall transmission dynamics of the pandemic .

Vulnerable groups: Population groups that have been more frequently reported having severe disease and death include 

people above 60 years of age, males, people with underlying conditions such as hyperte nsion, diabetes, cardiovascular 

disease, chronic respiratory disease and cancer [16,25,28,43,44] . The proportion of most of the reported chronic diseases RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

5

and health conditions is similar to the prevalence of these conditions in the elderly age groups in China, therefore they might 

be surrogates of increasing age only . Higher ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme II) gene expression may be linked to 

higher susceptibility to SARS -CoV -2. It has been shown that ACE 2 expre ssion in lung tissues increases with age, tobacco -use 

and with some hypertensive treatment. These observations might explain the vulnerability of older people, tobacco -

users /smokers and those with hypertension; they also highlight the importance of identif ying smokers as a potential 

vulnerable group for COVID -19 [45 -48] .

There is limited scientific evidence on the severity of illness among pregnant women with COVID -19 . Pregnant women 

appear to experience similar cl inical manifestations as non -pregnant adult patients with COVID -19 pneumonia. There is no 

evidence of severe adverse outcomes in neonates due to maternal COVID -19 pneumonia , and the virus has not been found 

in breastmilk [49,50] .

Currently available information indicates that children are as likely to be infected as adults , however they experience mild 

clinical manifestations [34,51] . About 2.4% of the total reported cases in China (as of 20 February 2020) were individuals 

under 19 years of age. A very small proportion of those aged under 19 years have developed severe (2.5%) or critical 

disease (0.2%) [16] .

Estimates of  all of the abo ve  parameters are likely to be revised  and refined  as more information becomes available. 

There is currently no specific treatment or vaccine against COVID -19 infection, however several clinical trials are recruiting 

globally to assess the effect of diffe rent treatment options and some information in clinical case management is provided 

under ‘Options for response’ .

# Modelling scenarios related to epidemic peak and health care 

# capacity saturation 

ECDC estimated the risk of saturation of intensive care unit (ICU) beds and non -ICU beds, as well as hospital isolation 

capacity (airborne infection isolation rooms and single -bed rooms), through a simulation approach using hospita l data of the 

2016 -2017 ECDC point -prevalence survey of healthcare -associated infectio ns in acute care hospitals [52] . Hospital capacity 

was evaluated as a function of increasing prevalence of hospitalised COVID -19 cases per 100 000 population, for three levels 

of hospitalised COVID -19 patients requiring ICU care (5%, 18% and 30% severity scenarios ), and using bed occupancy rates 

measured outside the winter season. The 14 -days cumulative notification per 100 000 population was used as a proxy of the 

prevalence of active COVID -19 cases. 

Based on these estimates f our EU/EEA countries [0 - 10, depending on severity] would have a high risk of seeing their ICU 

capability saturated at a prevalence of 10 hospitalised COVID -19 cases per 100 000 population (approximately twice the 

Mainland China prevalence scenario at the peak of the epidemic). At a prevalence of 18 hospitalised cases per 1 00 000 (the 

Lombardy scenario as of 5 March) 12 countries [0 – 21 , depending on severity ] have a high risk of ICU capability becoming 

saturated. The ICU capacity of all [7 - 28] countries would be exceed ed at a prevalence of 100 hospitalised per 100 000 (t he 

Hubei province scenario at the peak of the epidemic) (Annex 2). Nonetheless, despite ICU capacity saturation in most 

countries , more than half of the countries (17) would still have a residual non -ICU bed capacity in the Hubei scenario. 

The airborne in fection isolation room capacity would be saturated in all countries, well before reaching a prevalence of 10 

hospitalised cases per 100 000. In the same prevalence scenario, six countries would not have residual isolation capacity in 

single rooms either, a nd no country would have any single room capacity left in a Hubei province scenario. It is important to 

emphasise that the time needed to reach a saturation situation depends on the size of the country, but that at regional and 

sub -regional level, hospital systems may be overwhelmed much earlier. 

According to predictions o f the 14 -day cumulative notification rate , the majority of EU/EEA countries would reach the Hubei 

scenario by end of March and all countries by mid -April 2020 . These predictions need to b e interpreted with caution because 

of prediction intervals inherent to modelling, and because of the underlying assumptions of : 1) a stable diagnostic testing 

policy and capacity and 2) an absence of effect ive mitigation measures. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

6

# 3 ECDC risk assessment 

Many unknowns remain regarding the virulence/pathogenicity, the ef fectiveness of different modes of transmission , the 

proportion of mild and asymptomatic cases, the infectivity during the incubation period and during recovery , the impact of 

individual or p opulation -based preventive measures , the risk factors for severe illness besides age, and the effectiveness of 

treatment regimes . So far, detailed epidemiological data available are still limited .

This assessment is based on facts known to ECDC at the time of publication, and unless otherwise stated, the assessment of 

risk refers to the risk that exists at the time of writing this report. It follows the ECDC rapid risk assessment methodology 

with relevant adaptations [53] .

# Risk assessment questions 

 What is the overall risk, as of 11 March 2020, associated with COVID -19 for the EU/EEA and UK ?

 What is the risk of sub -national community transmission occurring in countries in the EU/EEA and the UK in the 

coming weeks? 

 What is the probability of widespread national community transmission in the EU /EEA and the UK in the coming 

weeks? 

 What is the risk of healthcare system capacity being exceeded in the EU/EEA and the UK in the coming weeks? 

 What is th e risk associated with transmission of COVID -19 in health and social care institutions with large vulnerable 

populations? 

# What is the overall risk , as of 12 March 2020 , associated with COVID -19 infection 

# for the EU/EEA and UK ?

The risk of severe disease as sociated with COVID -19 infection for people in the EU/EEA and UK is currently 

considered moderate for the general population and high for older adults and individuals with chronic 

underlying conditions . In addition, the risk of milder disease, and the cons equent impact on social and work -

related activity, is considered high. 

This assessment is based on the following factors: 

 There are an increasing number of cases in several EU/EEA countries without epidemiological links to explain the 

source of transmissio n. In some countries , transmission within healthcare settings has been reported affecting 

healthcare workers . As reported cases increase globally in a growing number of countries (found  here ), the likelihood 

of continued introductions into and between EU/EEA countries will increase. Given these factors, t he probability of 

further transmission in the EU/EEA and the UK is considered very high. The speed with which COVID -19 can cause 

nationally incapacitating epidemics once transmission within the community is established indicates that it is likely that 

in a few weeks or even days, similar situations to those seen in China and Italy may be seen in other EU/EEA 

countries or the UK, as more countries report evidence of community transmission. 

 The evidence from analyses of cases to date is that COVID -19 infection causes mild disease (i.e. non -pneumonia or 

mild pneumonia) in about 80% of cases and most cases recover, 14% develop more severe disease and 6% 

experience critical illness. Severe illness and death is more common among the elderly and those with other chronic 

underlying conditions, with these risk groups accounting for the majority of severe disease and fatalities to da te. In 

the event of a disruption of healthcare services , the impact could be very high. In addition to the public health impact 

with substantial fatal outcomes in high -risk groups, COVID -19 outbreaks can cause huge economic and societal 

disruptions. 

# What is the r isk of occurrence of subnational community transmission of COVID -

# 19 in the EU/EEA and the UK in the coming weeks? 

The risk of the occurrence of subnational community transmission of COVID -19 in the EU/EEA and the UK is 

currently considered very hig h.

This assessment is based on the following factors: 

 Several events already reported in Europe indicate that local transmission may have resulted in several sub -national 

clusters. The accumulated evidence from clusters reported in the EU/EEA and the UK in dicates that once imported, 

the virus causing COVID -19 can be transmitted rapidly. It is plausible that a proportion of transmissions occur from 

cases with mild symptoms that do not provoke healthcare -seeking behaviour. The increase in case numbers and the 

number of countries reporting those cases globally increases the potential routes of importation of the infection into 

and between countries in the EU/EEA and the UK. The likelihood of this occurring depends on the speed of detection 

of local transmission and whether effective response measures are applied early enough at -scale. Early evidence from 

several settings globally indicates that rigorous public health measures , particularly related to isolation and social 

distancing , implemented immediately after identifying cases can reduce but does not exclude the probability of further 

spread. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

7

 The impact of such clusters in local areas would be high, but would depend on national capacity to organise surge 

capacity across regions. The impact would be especially high if hospitals are affected and a large number of 

healthcare workers need to be isolated or become infected . The impact on vulnerable groups in the affected hospitals 

or healthcare facilities would be severe, in particular for the elderly. 

# What is the r isk of occurrence of widespread national community transmission of 

# COVID -19 in the EU /EEA and UK in the coming weeks ?

The risk of occurrence of widespread national community transmission of COVID -19 in the EU/EEA and the UK 

in the coming weeks is high .

Th is assessment is based on the following factors: 

 There is an increasing number of countries with local community transmission around the world and in Europe , and a 

growing number of areas reporting local sub -national community transmission. E xportations ha ve caused transmission 

in previously unaffected areas. The control measures have , up to now , only been able to slow the further spread, but 

not to stop it. If numerous local sub -national clusters of community transmission arise simultaneously, they could 

merge into a situation of widespread national community transmission . The likelihood of this occurring depends on 

the speed of detection of local transmission and whether effective response measures are applied early enough and 

at -scale. Early evidence from several settings globally indicates that rigorous public health measures , particularly 

related to isolation and social distancing, implemented immediately after identifying cases can reduce but does not 

exclude the probability of further spread. Evidence to -date from China , and emerging evidence from Korea , indicates 

that early decisive actions may reduce community transmission. 

 The impact of national community transmission would be high, especially if hospitals are affected and a large number 

of healthca re workers need to be isolated or become infected. The impact on vulnerable groups in the affected 

hospitals or healthcare facilities would be severe, in particular for the elderly. 

# What is the r isk of healthcare system capacity being exceeded in the EU/EE A and 

# the UK in the coming weeks? 

The risk of healthcare system capacity being exceeded in the EU/EEA and the UK in the coming weeks is 

considered high. 

This assessment is based on the following factors: 

 As the number of reported COVID -19 cases in the EU/ EEA and the UK has increased in the last 10 days, very quickly 

in several EU/EEA countries, the probability of increased clusters in local areas and increased widespread community 

transmission is considered high . Analyses carried out by ECDC indicate that if the pandemic progresses on its current 

course without strong countermeasures or surge capacity enacted, that most EU/EEA countries will far exceed the 

available ICU capacity they currently have available by the end of March. 

 Influenza season is still ongoing, creating a heavy burden on ICU s, however, EU/EEA countries might have already 

moved past the peak period of high influenza circulation and countries reporting hospital data saw a declining number 

of hospitalisations due to influenza over the last few weeks . This allows for some optimism regarding the availability 

of ICU beds, although the mean duration of ICU hospitalisation for influenza is around 10 days . For the latest 

influenza update see the joint  ECDC –WHO/Europe weekly influenza update  [54] .

 The continued pattern of increase in COVID -19 cases is very similar to that of Hubei province in mid - and late -January 

2020. If the increase continues , in the absen ce of the application of mitigation measures, the potential impact on the 

public health and overall healthcare systems would be high. Increasing numbers of imported cases from other EU 

countries and local transmission chains requir e substantial ly more reso urces , i.e. staff for case management, 

surveillance, and contact tracing , which in some countries is beginning to or already has overstretched public 

healthcare systems . Risk communication to concerned members of the public and healthcare professionals con tinues 

to demand significant and growing staff resources. As testing needs for COVID -19 increase, some laboratories are 

reporting crucial shortages affecting diagnostic capacity for COVID -19 and other laboratory services . Further 

increased transmission cou ld result in a significant increase of hospital admissions at a time when healthcare systems 

may already be under pressure from the current influenza season. Several parts of Italy have already reported 

healthcare system saturation due to very high patient loads requiring intensive care . Already stretched capacity would 

be further exacerbated if substantial numbers of healthcare workers became infected with COVID -19 . The impact of 

increased pressure on the health system introduced by COVID -19 is dependent o n the level of preparedness and 

surge capacity that a given country or area has enacted or can quickly enact .

 While it is likely not feasible to stop the spread of COVID -19 in the EU/EEA, it is essential to introduce measures to 

slow down the spread of the virus in the population in order to allow healthcare systems to put in place surge 

capacity measures to absorb more severe COVID -19 cases. These options are listed under ‘Options for response’ and 

recent ECDC guidance documents [55] . The implementation of these mitigation measures will determine the eventual 

level of impact of the epidemic on health system capacity. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

8

# What is the risk associated with transmission of COVID -19 in health and social 

# care institutions with large vulnerable populations? 

The risk associated with transmission of COVID -19 in health and social institutions with large vulnerable 

populations is co nsidered high. 

This assessment is based on the following factors: 

 The number of reported COVID -19 cases in the EU/EEA and the UK has increased in the last 10 days, very quickly in 

several EU/EEA countries, and the probability of increased clusters in local areas is considered high. In some settings, 

transmission within healthcare settings, including long -term care facilities has been reported. It is plausible that a 

proportion of transmissions occur from cases with mild symptoms that do not provoke healthca re -seeking behaviour ,

however these cases can still transmit the virus . If health and social institutions are exposed to the virus by health 

workers or family members with mild infection, the virus could spread quickly in such a setting, in the absence of very 

early detection and highly effective infection control. The probability of transmiss ion in such settings can be modified 

by the level of implementation of robust IPC measures and early detection and isolation of introduced cases in 

patients, residents or staff. 

 The great majority of the most severe illnesses and deaths have occurred among the elderly and those with other 

chronic underlying conditions. Thus, the impact on vulnerable groups in affected hospitals or healthcare facilities 

would be severe, in particular for the elderly. The impact would be especially high if a large number of healthcare or 

social care workers need to be isolated or become infected. 

# 4 Preparedness and public health response 

Five scenarios describ ing the possible progression of the COVID -19 outbreak in EU/EEA countries were presented in ECDCs 

fifth Rapid Risk Assessment on COVID -19 (Annex 1) [56] .

Currently, EU /EEA countries’ epidemiological situation varies by region , but analysis of the epidemic progression indicates 

that the situation in Italy and other EU/EEA countries are generally following the epidemic curve that was note d in China 

during January and February and by South Korea in recent weeks . While most countries in the EU/EEA and the UK are 

currently in scenario 2, all available data indicates that they are very rapid ly moving toward a scenario of sustained 

community tr ansmission of COVID -19 (scenario 3 ). The situation is evolving quickly , and the currently notified cases reflect a 

situation in terms of transmission pressures about a week ago. Therefore , a proactive and aggressive approach is needed to 

delay transmission , as containing transmission in a specific area or country in the EU/EEA is no longer considered feasible 

(Figure 1) . A rapid shift from a containment to a mitigation approach is required as the rapid increase in cases anticipated in 

the coming days to few weeks may not provide decision makers and hospitals enough time to realise, accept and adapt their 

response accordingly if not implemented ahead of time. 

All EU/EEA countries should immediately and proactively initiate appropriate , proportional and evide nce -based response 

options to prevent a situation of evolution to scenario 4, where the intensive care capacity is saturated and health system s

are overwhelmed. The options provided below, therefore, focus on scenarios 2 -4, which describe local and nationw ide 

transmission scenarios . Options for scenarios 0 and 1 can be found in ECDC’ s previous risk assessment [56] 

In the current phase of the pandemic in the EU/EEA, priority response measures should focus on high -risk groups, healthcare 

systems and healthcare workers in order to ensure rapid detection and diagnosis of cases and protect healthcare staff, 

patient s and other contacts from exposure. Measures to ensure appropriate functioning of the healthcare system (including 

laboratories) with increasing numbers of cases should be implemented. Social distancing measures and risk communication 

remain essential pill ars to effective mitigation approaches, while rational testing, contact tracing and surveillance approaches 

can be implemented to match resource availability and capacity. 

The options proposed for preparedness and response aim to limit the impact of the pandemic on healthcare systems and 

vulnerable population groups by delaying the epidemic peak and decreasing the magnitude of the peak .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

9

Figure 1 . Illustration of the objectives of community mitigation measures in a scenario of widespread 

community transmis sion of COVD -19 

# Activation of pandemic preparedness plans 

All EU/EEA Member States should have activated their pandemic preparedness plans in the context of COVID -19 . In 

scenario s 3 and 4, it is crucial that all critical elements of pandemic preparedness plans are up to date and response 

strategies are al ready be ing implemented in a coordinated fashion across government d ep artments and sectors of society .

Focused attention should be given to the areas of command , control and intersectoral coordination, co ordinated risk 

communication, hospital preparedness, and business continuity planning for the healthcare sector and critical societal 

services .

The infrastructure for rapid intersectoral information exchange and decision -making should be effective to enab le 

communication and coordination of response strategies between the national crisis team and relevant stakeholders and 

sectors from the regional to the national level s. To operationalise the response system, it is important to establish both the 

legal fra mework and develop standardised procedures that enable its implementation. Therefore , the roles and 

responsibilities of all relevant stakeholders involved in the risk management within or outside the national crisis team and the 

lines of communication shou ld be defined. The overall crisis management scheme should be informed by public health risk 

assessments and by monitoring of key indicators of response. For the public health sector these include : surveillance, 

laboratory diagnostics , case investigation and contact tracing ; for the healthcare system: isolation capacity, occupancy rate s

for regular and ICU beds , PPE availability , availability of essential drugs, equipment for mechanical ventilation and 

oxygenation and other hospital supplies .

Hospital prep aredness and activation of contingency plans is an absolute priority at this moment. In healthcare settings, 

surge capacity plans should be developed and/or revised to address the expected high demand for care of increased 

numbers of patients with moderate or severe respiratory distress. Accumulating anecdotal evidence from north Italy points to 

significant pressure experienced in emergency departments and critical care services , specifically in the availability of 

ventilator equipment and PPE . Evidence fro m China, South Korea and Italy points at the need to: 

1) design and implement an overall strategy of discouraging symptomatic patients from presenting to any facility without 

prior instructions 

2) designate treatment facilities both for mild and for sever e COVID -19 cases with critical care capabilities (e.g. ECMO). This 

implies activation of hospital plans to the highest level to be able to cancel elective diagnostic and operative procedures and 

re -assign human resources , creating temporary treatment facil ities for the mild cases or advising self -isolation until 

symptoms improve or worsen [57,58] .

3) Ban access to hospitals to family and friends of admitted patients. In addition, decreasing the administrati ve workload for 

healthcare workers e.g. providing sick leave certificates electronically or by phone, would f ree up resources. Finally, it is 

crucial to prepare or adapt business continuity plans for healthcare facilities in accordance with the latest publ ic health risk 

assessment and guidance from national, regional or local health authorities to ensure continuity of essential health services. 

For more details, please consider the related  hospital preparedness checklist  [59] .

It is important that planned response strategies, including diagnostic testing, can be adapted according to case finding 

strategies and adjusted to a surge of cases by de -escalating procedures that might no longer be feasible and/ or beneficial 

[60] .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

10 

It is crucial to also prepare or adapt business continuity plans for non -healthcare settings in accordance with the latest public 

health risk assessment and guidance from national, regional or local health authorities to ensure continuity of essential 

serv ices (e.g. transportation, energy, and information technology sectors). Overall, t he business continuity plan s should 

define the procedures and processes a business or organisation or healthcare facility should follow in response to the 

potential impact of COVID -19 on critical functions (processes, assets and human resources). The plan should also include 

policies and recommendations for employees with symptoms of acute respiratory illness, routine e nv ironmental cleaning and 

travel health advice [61] based on the objectives of the business continuity plan. Collaboration with supply chain partners 

and other st akeholders has to be initiated to understand the usage, availability and access to critical resources, and 

sustainable financing mechanisms could be put in place. 

# Risk communication 

A high level of public awareness is a prerequisite for an effective resp onse with social distancing measures to the COVID -19 

outbreak . Risk communication activities should emphasi se that although this is a new and highly contagious disease, the vast 

majority of infected people will recover. Easily accessible information should be available on the signs and symptoms (i.e. 

fever and dry cough) of COVID -19 ; the contact details of local health services and national hotlines ; the population groups at 

high risk of severe disease ; social distancing measures that may be in place ; and travel advice . All relevant audiences should 

be targeted, including through the use of appropriate minority languages . M onitoring system s should be put in place to 

observe public perceptions , opinions and compliance with individual measures . Procedures for identifying and rapidly 

addressing m isinformation , disinformation and rumours , especially on social media platforms, should be established .

The public need for accurate, evidence -based information and advice on COVID -19 are very high , and extraordinary eff orts 

for rapid and continuous information provision to the general public and healthcare staff should be ongoing. Information 

should be communicated in a transparent and consistent way to stakeholders and to the public, according to the unfolding 

epidemiol ogical situation. Risk communication strategies should clearly provide the rationale behind any non -pharmaceutical 

countermeasures that are implemented or planned , such as social distancing. 

The need for individual and shared responsibility should be emph asised through a focus on frequent hand washing , always 

covering the mouth and nose with tissues or elbow when sneezing or coughing , and implementation of self -isolation when 

symptomatic. Messaging on self -isolation and voluntary quarantines should encoura ge consideration of a support system to 

provide essential services and supplies (e.g. food and medication ). Vulnerable individuals including the elderly, those with 

underlying health conditions, disabled people, people with mental health problems, homeless people, and undocumented 

migrants will require extra support and perhaps specific communication channels and language . Authorities may want to 

consider coordinating with and supporting civil society and religious groups who already work with these populat ions . Please 

refer to the  guidance on community engagement  for more details. 

# Infection prevention and control in healthcare settings 

An important proportion of reported cases in China and Italy, especially from the initial period of the outbreaks have been 

among healthcare workers. Such cases have important consequences in addition to the health of the individuals , as

quarantine measures may need to be put in place for close contacts among staff , and the exposure may be life threatening 

for exposed patients in the healthcare facilities. Therefore infection prevention and control (IPC) practices are of critical 

importa nce in controlling the COVID -19 pandemic protecting the functioning of healthcare services and mitigating the impact 

on vulnerable populations. 

ECDC has published an update of its  technical report  on infection prevention and control ( IPC ) for the care of patients with 

COVID -19 in healthcare settings [60] . The update , for administrators and healthcare professionals , outline s tech nical 

measures and resources for reducing the risk of transmission of COVID -19 in healthcare settings , including LTCF, and 

laboratories in the EU /EEA. Guidance is provided for preparedness; triage, initial contact and assessment in primary and 

emergency ca re ; patient transport ; e nvironmental cleaning ; and waste management .

The immediate priority is to d esignate a full -time staff member at each health facility to be the lead for infection prevention 

and control and preparedness for COVID -19, responsible for the education and training of staff , including full compliance 

with hand hygiene according to  WHO’s 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene approach before touching a patient  [62] . Training on 

stan dard IPC precautions for all staff should be initiated . If feasible, provide training to those who may be required for 

healthcare provision during surge capacity, for example agency staff, student doctors/nurses and retired health 

professionals. 

Respirato ry hygiene measures include ensuring that all staff and patients cover their nose and mouth with a tissue or elbow 

when coughing or sneezing; offering a medical mask to those with suspected 2019 -nCoV infection while they are in 

waiting/public areas or in c ohorting rooms; and performing hand hygiene after conta ct with respiratory secretions. Staff with 

symptoms compatible with COVID -19 should contact a pre -identified 24/7 contact line at the facility and self -isolate . If a 

suspected or confirmed case of COVI D-19 is detected in a facility, all staff should be informed [60] . If cases are cared for in 

the home environment , IPC measures are outlined in the WHO guidance for homecare of patients with COVID -19 [63] .

LTCFs should implement the baseline options for preparedness for COVID -19 described in the guidance document, given that 

the rapidity of an onset of a COVID -19 outbreak may result in insufficient time to implement the necessary IPC [60] .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

11 

Countries and healthcare institutions should identify additional facilities (e.g. healthcare units, departments, or existing healthcare 

buildings) that can be used for the cohorting of cases with mild symptoms, in advance of capacity being exceeded in existing 

healthcare facilities. Cohorting may help conserve PPE and reduce the ri sk of transmission to non -cases . The minimum 

requirements for units designated for the management of confirmed CO VID -19 patients are the availability of isolation rooms 

with a dedicated bathroom, staff adequately trained in the safe diagnostic evaluation and management of COVID -19 

patients; the availability of appropriate PPEs; adequate laboratory suppo rt; and approp riate cleaning and waste management 

procedures . Negative pressure isolation rooms are strongly recommended for the performance of aerosol generating 

procedures [60] .

ECDC published a  technical report  on  perso nal protective equipment  needs in healthcare settings for the care of patients with 

suspected or confirmed COVID -19 [57,64] . When using PPE, the correct donning and doffing process should be followed; 

further information on these procedures can be found in the ECDC Technical Document ‘ Guidance for wearing and removing 

personal protecti ve equipment in healthcare settings for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID -19 ’ [65] .

[66] 

# Rational use of PPE and hand hygiene materials for the care and management of 

# COVID -19 

As of March 2020, countries worldwide that are facing COVID -19 are experiencing reduced access to PPE and hand hygiene 

materials [67] . An immediate priority has been set at EU level to ens ure adequate production and supply of PPE for 

healthcare workers and patients , and a joint procurement process has been launched by the European Commission for 

interested EU Member States . Coordinated supply chains for PPE should ensure distribution of suc h materials to healthcare 

systems to reduce the potential for healthcare -associated transmission to vulnerable g roups and to healthcare -workers [66] 

Cross -border supply and donations to highly affected areas should continue in order to decrease overall infection pressures in 

EU/EEA countries. 

The ECDC guidance document ‘Infection prevention and control for the care of patients with nove l coronavirus in healthcare 

settings – 1st Update ’ [60] highlights both best practice for PPE and also highlights options for hospitals and LTCFs that have 

limited access to such materials. The main priorities in this document for rational use are in concordance with detailed 

guidance published by WHO in February 2020 [68] . A nasopharyngeal swab is an aerosol -generating procedure (AGP), 

because, for example, it can induce coughing [69] .

In order to maximize the use of available PPE in the event of insufficient stocks, staff should be allocated to perform a 

procedure , or set of procedures in designated areas. For example, designate staff for swabbing procedures in a dedicated 

swabbing area. 

Priorities for use of respirators ( FFP2/3 )

 The highest priority is for healthcare workers, m ost particular ly those performing AGP, including tracheal intubation, 

bronchial suctioning, bronchoscopy, and sputum induction. ECDC emphasises that taking a nasopharyngeal swab as 

part of a test for COVID -19 is a n AGP ;

 Respirators can be used for up to 4 hours for multiple patients without removing them [68] , unless the respirator is 

damaged, soiled or contaminated, for example a symptomatic suspected case coughing on them .; 

 In the absence of FFP2/3 respirators, healthcare workers should use masks with the highest available filter level ;

 If there is an insufficient stock of respirators, then staff engaged in environmental cleaning and waste management 

should wear a su rgical mask, in addition to gloves, goggles and gown [66] .

Priorities for use of surgical masks 

 The highest priority are for symptoma tic confirmed cases of COVID -19, followed by suspected cases ;

 The next highest priority is for those caring for COVID -19 patients, if no respirators are available. 

Priorities for use of alcohol -based hand rub 

 Prioritise rigorous hand -washing practices us ing water and soap, ensuring access to hand -washing facilities ;

 If alcohol -based hand rub is not available , t he highest priority is at the point -of -care, prioritising confirmed cases. If 

sufficient stocks are available, place in common areas with high foot fall outside of designated COVID -19 areas .

Priorities for use of other PPE and hand hygiene products 

 If insufficient quantities of gowns are available, use aprons ;

 If insufficient quantities of goggles and/or visors are available for the recommended uses d escribed below, use 

products that can be decontaminated, if available. Otherwise, consider decontamination and reuse, consulting the 

guidelines of the manufacturer ;

 Regular cleaning followed by disinfection is recommended, using hospital disinfectants acti ve against viruses, for 

rooms accessed by patients/residents, furniture and frequently touched surfaces. In the event of shortages of hospital 

disinfectants, decontamination may be performed using 0.1% sodium hypochlorite (dilution 1:50 if household bleach 

at an initial concentration of 5% is used) after cleaning with a neutral detergent, although no data are available for 

the effectiveness of this approach against COVID -19 [70] . Surfaces that may become damaged by sodium 

hypochlorite may be cleaned with a neutral detergent followed by a 70% concentration of ethanol ;RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

12 

 In LTCFs with insufficient quantities of paper to wels, use clean cloth towels and replace them regularly, washing them 

with a detergent such as household washing powder [71] .

# Clinical c ase m anagement of COVID -19 cases 

Clinical presentation among reported cases of COVID -19 varies in severity from asymptomatic and subclinical infection or 

mild illness to severe or fatal illness. Some reports suggest there is the potential for clinical deterioration during the second 

week of illness . Chinese data suggest a severity profile of about 80% mild cases (including subclinical), 13 -15% moderate to 

severe cases req uiring oxygen supplementation and hospitali sation and up to 5% critically ill, requiring ICU support 

[16,25,72,73] . For a description of vulnerable groups please see section above “Disease background”. 

Patients wit h a mild clinical presentation (mainly with fever, cough, headache and malaise) may not initially require 

hospitalisation and can be safely managed at home . However, as clinical signs and symptoms may worsen with progressive 

dyspnoea due to lower respirato ry tract disease in the second week of illness; all patients should be monitored closely. An 

estimated 10 -15% of mild cases will progress to severe and 15 -20% of severe cases will become critical according to the Chinese 

data [16] .

Average progression times include the following: 

 For mild cases: from onset of symptoms to recovery almost 2 weeks 

 For severe cases: from onset of symptoms to recovery 3 -6 weeks , and from onset of symptoms to death 2 -8 weeks. 

Designated facilities for caring for COVID -19 patients with mild symptoms should be considered in scenarios 3 and 4 in order to 

cohort confirmed cases and limit further transmission in the household. However, i n scenario 3, and especially in scenario 4, home 

health care can be considered for those presenting with mild symptoms, unless there is concern for rapid deterioration. Home 

health care could also be considered for symptomatic patients no longer requiring hospitalisation, where inpatient care is 

unavailable or unsafe (i.e. limited capacity and resources unable to meet demand for healthcare services) or in a case of informed 

refusal of hospitalisation [63] . Rigorous education for cases and their household members is needed for appropriate IPC practices 

to limit secondary transmission. 

Criteria to be considered when deciding whether a confirm ed COVID -19 case can be safely discharged (i.e. without being 

infectious) from hospital have been proposed by ECDC [74] . Clinical criteria such as resolution of symptoms or absence of fever 

and laboratory evidence of SARS -CoV -2 clearance from upper respiratory tract should be considered but also adapted to the 

local context i.e. exi sting capacity of the healthcare system, laboratory diagnosis resources and the current epidemiology 

situation. After discharge, 14 days of further isolation at home or in other community care settings is advised, provided that 

regular health monitoring is ensured (e.g. follow -up visits, phone calls) and conditions to protect family members and the 

community from infection and further spread of SARS -CoV -2 exist. 

Patients with severe illness should be cared for in a designated treatment hospital and should be placed in an airborne infection 

isolation room if available, or in a single room with private bathroom. Guidance for clinical care of severe cases is availab le from 

WHO [75] and from the US CDC [76] . In scenarios 3 and 4 , solutions to increase hospital s urge capacity can be explored as 

discussed above in the options for preparedness. 

No antiviral or other pharmaceutical is currently recommended for the treatment of COVID -19 cases , although clinical trials with the 

combination lopinavir/ritonavir and the orphan drug redemsivir are ongoing in Asian countries and the USA. Compassionate use of 

remdesivir has been used for severe cases in EU countries. The evidence for the potential effectiveness of chloroquine is from 

in 

vitro trials and unpublished single ar m studies in China at this point. Inhalational interferon beta 1a is also among potentially 

interesting candidates for treatment or prophylaxis [77] . Recruiting patients in Europe into multinational clinical trials to ensure 

rapid data collection and assessment of the safety and effectiveness of trea tment options is an immediate priority in countries in the 

early phases of the outbreak. 

Health authorities are encouraged to monitor the treatment modalities used in their countries , and p hysicians treating COVID -19 

cases are also invited to join WHO’s cl inical network where new therapeutic options and experiences are exchanged. 

# Community measures 

ECDC  guidelines  for the u se of non -pharmaceutical countermeasures to delay and mitigate the impact of the COVID -19 

pandemic include a description of the measures that can be applied in the community: infection prevention and control, 

social distancing, travel -related and screening s of travellers [55] .

# Infection prevention and control in the community 

The use of personal protective measures (i. e. rigorous hand hygiene, cough etiquette, and face masks) may contribute to reducing 

the risk of transmitting or acquiring COVID -19 infections. 

 Rigorous hand -washing schemes, including washing of hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or clea ning 

hands with alcohol -based solutions, gels or tissues is recommended in all community settings in all possible scenarios. 

Organisations should ensure availability of sufficiently and suitabl y located washbasins and taps , as well as hand gels, 

to encoura ge washing. Proper hand hygiene will also reduce the transmission of other communicable diseases. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

13 

 Covering the mouth and nose when coughing and sneezing (e.g. by using a paper tissue , and sneezing or coughing 

into the elbow ) may mechanically block the dro plet transmission that is believed to be the principal transmission 

mode for COVID -19. The proper disposal of used tissues is important, followed by immediate hand washing after 

coughing/sneezing. 

 The use of surgical face masks decrease s the risk of infec ting others when worn by a person with respiratory 

symptoms before seeking medical advice and while being assessed. There is no evidence on the usefulness of face 

masks worn by persons who are not ill , therefore this is not advisable [55] . It is possible that the use of facemasks by 

untrained people may even increase the risk of infection due to a false sense of securi ty and increased contact 

between hands, mouth and eyes. In view of scenario 4, reserving PPE for use by healthcare workers should be a

priority. 

All people with progressing acute respiratory infections (with or without travel history) should be advised to seek medical 

attention, first by phone , in case symptoms worsen. Risk groups should be told to seek medical advice early, given the 

possibility of more rapid progression to severe disease .

# Social distancing measures 

Appropriate social distancing measures have to be strictly implemented . In the current phase of the pandemic in the EU/EEA, 

self -isolation of symptomatic persons and monitoring of symptoms of healthy contacts will reduce local transmission. 

Although there is some evidence that the infectious p eriod may begin just before symptom onset , most of the infectiousness 

likely coincides with the symptomatic period , even when symptoms are mild and very non -specific. The infectious period is 

now estimated to last for 7 -12 days in moderate cases and up to 2 weeks in severe cases [22] .

Individual social distancing measures (e.g. avoiding shaking hands and kissing, and avoiding crowded transports and non -

essential meetings and mass gatherings) should be recommended at organisational, national and EU levels as a preventiv e

measure. 

Additional steps include school and day care measures or closures, measures at the workplace, and measures related to 

mass gatherings. In some countries such as China, and more recently in Italy, internal travel restrictions or “Cordon 

sanitaire ” have been imposed on large populations together with other containment measures. 

The evidence for the effectiveness of closing schools and workplaces, and cancelling mass gatherings is limited. However, 

one modelling study from China estimated that if a range of non -pharmaceutical interventions, including social distancing, 

had been conducted one week, two weeks, or three weeks earlier in the country, the number of COVID -19 cases could have 

been reduced by 66%, 86%, and 95%, respectively, together with s ignificantly reducing the number of affected areas [72] .

School and day care measures or closure 

Before or instead of closures, health authorities should plan to reduce transmission opportunities within schools while 

children continue to attend through other measures . These may include smaller school groups, increasing physical distance 

between children in the class, promotion of washing of hands and outdoor classes. In the event of illness, strict isolation of 

sick children and staff at home or healthcare facilities is advisa ble in all the scenarios. 

The impact of generali sed school closure in limiting the progression of the COVID -19 pandemic is uncertain . Evidence 

originating from seasonal and pandemic influenza modelling studies have shown that proactive school closures bef ore the 

peak of influenza virus activity have had a positive impact in reducing local transmission and delaying the peak of the 

influenza activity [73] . While COVID -19 causes disease in children, it is mostly mild, and it is not known whether or the 

extent to which asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic children play an important role in transmission of the virus. Therefore, 

proactive school closures should be carefully considered in the context of a series of other prevention and mitigation layers 

to reduce the transmission of COVID -19 weigh ing the expected impact of the epidemic against the adverse effects of such 

closures on the community. School closures may have an impact on a vailability of healthcare staff, due to the need to caring 

for their children when not in school . Also, if grandparents are asked to care for the children, the benefits of lower 

transmission between children might be offset by transmission into a more vuln erable population group. In order for school 

closures to be effective, mixing of school -aged children in other settings outside of schools should be avoided. 

Proactive school closures may be considered as a means of reduc ing the burden of influenza cases on healthcare systems, 

especially if influenza is circulating in the community . This could thereby create capacity for managing cases of COVID -19 in 

scenarios 2 and 3. Reactive closures of schools may be necessary as a consequence of widespread virus tran smission in the 

community and educational settings in scenario 4. Such r eactive school and day -care closures will probably not reduce the 

impact of the epidemic, but may be needed due to high absenteeism and operational issues. 

Measures at the workplace 

Wo rkplace measures refer to a variety of actions to reduce the risk of transmission by decreasing contact opportunities in the 

workplace and the community. These measures could include for example: flexible working schedules/shifts for employees, 

the opportu nity of distance working/teleworking, encouraging physical distancing measures within the workspace, increased 

use of email and teleconferences to reduce close contacts, reduced contact between employees and customers, reduced 

contact between employees, ad option of flexible leave policies and promoting the use of other personal protective and 

environmental countermeasures [78] .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

14 

COVID -19 can be transmitted from person -to -person at workplaces and in other public settings where people gather in 

contained spaces for long periods. Viral transmission may therefore be reduced by decreasing the frequency and length of 

social interactions and physical contacts . Employers should encourage and support self -isolation of employees at home in 

case they experience respiratory symptoms ; e fforts should be made to identify symptomatic persons in the workplace for this 

purpose. 

Measures related to mass gatherings 

Mass gatherings, such as sport events , concerts, religious events and conferences increase the number of close contacts 

between people for long periods, sometimes in con fine d spaces , and may be attended by individuals who have travelled from 

widespread areas with differing levels of community transmission of the virus . Therefore, mass gatherings may lead to the 

introduction of the virus into the community hosting the event and/or facilitate virus transmission and spread. 

Measures to reduce the risk posed by mass gatherings include interperson al distancing measures to avoid crowding and 

organisational measures, such as cancellation or postponement of an event. Data originating from seasonal and pandemic 

influenza models indicate that during the mitigation phase, cancellations of mass gatherings before the peak of epidemics or 

pandemics may reduce virus transmission . T he cancellation of mass gatherings in areas with ongoing community 

transmission is, therefore , recommended. The decision to cancel will need to be coordinated by the organiser and p ublic 

health and other national authorities. Alternative modes of broadcasting the events should be explored. In case mass 

gathering events take place, h igh risk individuals should be advised not to participate. Other personal protective and 

environmental measures should be implemented. 

Due to the significant secondary effects (social, economic, etc.) of social distancing measures, the decision on their 

application should be based on a case -by -case risk assessment, depending on the impact of the epidemic a nd the local 

epidemiological situation [55] .

# Travel -related measures 

Travel facilitates the spread of COVID -19 from affected to unaffected areas. Travel and trade restrictions during a public 

health event of international concern (PHEIC) are regulated under the International Health Regulations (IHR), part III. 

Travel advice 

When travelling it is best to avoid contact w ith sick persons, in particular those with respiratory symptoms and fever. 

Travellers should also practice good hand hygiene. Travellers who develop acute respiratory symptoms within 14 days of 

returning from areas with ongoing local transmission should be advised to seek immediate medical attention, ideally by 

phone first, and indicate their travel history to the healthcare specialist. Several EU/EEA countries have issued, or are 

considering, travel advice. Such advice will be less useful in scenarios 3 -4, when ongoing community transmission is 

expected to occur in more places .

Travel restrictions 

China, Italy and some other countries ha ve used area quarantines, or so called ‘cordon sanitaire’ in addition to other 

measures on large cities, with the apparen t effect on delaying the spread of this disease in China [16] . Apart from the 

experience in China and historical assessments of measures during the 1918 influenza pandemic, t here is little evidence 

elsewhere to sugge st that such measures would work against respiratory virus epidemics, unless implemented with such a 

rigour that there is absolutely no movement across the ‘cordon’ and there is very low prior transmission outside the ‘cordon’ 

[79] .

Entry and exit screening of travellers 

Screening for COVID -19 involves the use of thermal scanning and/or symptom screening. A vailable evidence suggests that 

entr y and exit screening are not effective in delaying or mitigating a pandemic [55,80] or detecting incoming /outgoing 

travellers with infectious diseases. 

# Environmental cleaning and ventilation decontamination 

ECDC h as published an  Interim guidance for environmental cleaning in non -healthcare facilities exposed to 2019 -nCoV  to 

provide options for environmental cleaning and decontamination in non -healthcare facilities (e.g. rooms, public offices, 

transports, schools, etc.) where COVID -19 -confirmed cases have been before being diagnosed and/or admitted to hospital 

[81] . Although there is no evidence of the effectiveness of mechanical or natural air ventilation to reduce COVID -19 

transmission, there is mechanistic plausibility, and it should be applied, and enhanced especially in settings where people 

gather regularly [73] . Increasing the frequency of cleaning and maintenance of ventilation and air -conditioning units can be 

considered. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

15 

# Testing and surveillance strategy 

# Laboratory testing 

Timely and accurate laboratory testing of specimens from cases under investigation is an essential part of the management 

of COVID -19 and emerging infections in general. However, any shortage of laboratory diagnostic capacity at national or local 

level will hamper epidemic response . If countries need help in te sting, a pool of specialised referral laboratories have offered 

support within the EU/EEA [82] . Member States should monitor the changes in the epidemic situation and be prepared to 

adjust the laboratory diagnostic capacity to the changing needs. Anticipating a rapid increase in the demand, countries 

should continue roll ing out primary diagnostic testing capacity to local clinical and diagnostic laboratories. The specimen 

types to be collected are listed in the WHO laboratory guidance [83] .

When the diagnostic laboratories have established their SARS -CoV -2 detection as says and confirmed their first five positive 

and ten negative detection results with the national SARS -CoV -2 reference or international referral laboratories [83] , the 

diagnostic laboratories can confirm the test results by the secondary target gene in their own laboratory. In countries with 

limited transmission or local clusters, positive specimens should be subjected to confirmation by targeting a sec ond gene of 

SARS -CoV -2 in an RT -PCR assay. 

In areas with local community transmission of COVID -19, detection by RT -PCR of a single discriminatory target is considered 

sufficient [83] . Confirmatory testing should be performed only for specimens where the first result is technically not 

interpretable or the RT -PCR cycle threshold value is above 35. In such a case, additional sampling or repeated testing and 

confirmation is advised. Serological assays are under development , and collecting serum specimens i at symptom onset, or at 

admission and at convalescent stage , or at discharge , will be useful for later seroepidemiological studies and should be done 

for hospitalised patients and during specific outbreaks such as in schools or confined facilities. Several commercial assays for 

SARS -CoV -2 are on the market, however, information on their clinical performance is still limited . Validation of the 

commercial as says is an urgent priority that some laboratories have started to address .

Influenza testing at least of hospitalised patients with severe acute respiratory infections ( SARI ) should be continued as long 

as local circulation of influenza continues in order to initiate early antiviral treatment of influenza -infected patients . The 

differential diagnostics are also key for isolation and contact tracing of COVID -19 cases. 

Sentinel virological surveillance of outpatients with acute respiratory infections/influen za -like illness ( ARI/ILI ) for the 

monitoring of COVID -19 is recommended , based on the existing surveillance of influenza (see Surveillance section). A subset 

of patients should be swabbed based on geographical and population distribution. At regular interv als, a representative batch 

of positive specimens should be sent to a reference/referral laboratory for confirmation and further characterisation in orde r

to identify and follow up the evolutionary changes of the virus. Testing specimens from sentinel outp atient surveillance sites 

for COVID -19 should be continued for as long as possible. In case of any shortages of sampling materials, oropharyngeal and 

nasopharyngeal swabbing can be performed with one swab and combined for one diagnostic test. 

As per WHO b iosafety guideline, non -propagative diagnostic laboratory work (for example, sequencing, nucleic acid 

amplification test [NAAT]) should be conducted at a facility using procedures equivalent to Biosafety Level 2 (BSL -2) and 

propagative work (for example, v irus culture, isolation or neutralization assays) should be conducted at a containment 

laboratory with inward directional airflow (BSL -3). Patient specimens from suspected or confirmed cases should be 

transported as UN3373, ‘Biological Substance Category B ’. Viral cultures or isolates should be transported as Category A, 

UN2814, ‘infectious substance, affecting humans ’ [84] .

Countries should provide training to laboratory staff in laboratory diagnosis of SARS -CoV -2 as rapid expansion of laboratory 

diagnostic capacity is needed. 

# Shortages for laboratory testing for COVID -19 

Based on a rapid, 24 -hour turn around survey on 4 -5 March, to which 15 EU/EEA countries responded , the countries reported 

shortages on deliveries of swabbing material, p lastic consumables, RNA extraction and RT -PCR reagents such as enzymes, 

primers, probes and positive control material. In addition , shortages of PPE such as respirators, surgical masks, gloves and 

disinfectants for laboratory use were reported . The primary reasons for shortages were production bottlenecks. Based on the 

information available and modelling o f expected cases in Europe, laboratories should prepare themselves for critically 

increasing their testing volume . Shortages are not affecting only diagno stics of SARS -CoV -2 but also have an impact on other 

critical diagnostic testing for infectious diseases including screening for infectious pathogens for transplantation and beyond .

# Optimis ing t esting for COVID -19 

Countries across the EU/EEA might be in d ifferent scenarios, even within the same country, and testing approaches need to 

be adapted to the situation at national and local level. 

In scenarios 0 and 1, the strategy for testing should be in accordance with the ECDC case identification [85] . In addition, all 

patients with SARI requiring hospitalisation should be considered as suspected cases on admission and tested. As long as 

influenza is still circulating in the population, h ospitalised patients with SARI should also be tested for influenza to initiate 

early antiviral treatment and separate them from other patients .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

16 

Once local transmission has been reported in the country or area (scenarios 2 -4), as is the situation for most E U/EEA 

countries already or very soon, all patients presenting with symptoms of acute respiratory infection in primary care or the 

accident and emergency department of a hospital (first contact with the healthcare system) should be considered as 

suspected c ases (considering also local influenza epidemiology) . This may imply that a very large number of tests would 

need to be performed overwhelm ing testing capacity and priority groups will need to be established .

As a rational approach, the following should b e considered for priorit y testing (in decreasing order of importance) :

1. Testing of hospitalised patients with SARI in order to inform appropriate clinical management, including isolation and 

PPE measures; 

2. Testing any cases of acute respiratory infection in hospitals or long -term care facilities (LTCF) in order to guide 

infection control and PPE use to protect both vulnerable persons and healthcare staff; testing of symptomatic 

healthcare staff to guide decisions on exclusion from and return to work; the aim is to protect health and social care 

services; 

3. Testing of patients with ARI/ILI in sentinel outpatient clinics and among patients admitted to hospitals with SARI in 

order to assess virus circulation in the population. 

4. Elderly people with underlying chroni c medical conditions such as lung disease, cancer, heart failure, cerebrovascular 

disease, renal di sease, liver disease, diabetes, and immunocompromising conditions exhibiting signs of acute respiratory 

illness should be prioritised for testing, given that they may more rapidly need respiratory support. 

Healthcare workers should apply strict IPC measures when dealing with suspected cases (see below). During triage, 

suspected cases should be given a surgical mask and be directed to a separate area. Organisin g separate triaging areas or 

facilities in order to minimise contact between suspect cases and other patient groups should be considered . Such cohorting 

will also decrease the needs for PPE for staff. In South Korea and some EU/EEA countries, drive -in faci lities for testing have 

been established. 

# Surveillance 

Surveillance for COVID -19 is currently based on the EU case definition for probable and confirmed cases, which was updated 

on 02 March 2020 [86] and is in line with the updated case definition of the World Health Organization from 27 February 

2020 for the  global surveillance for human infection with COVID -19  [85] . The definition for a suspected case includes: people 

with ARI coming from an area with local transmission or contact with a confirmed case, as well as all SARI cases with no 

other aetiology irrespective of travel history or contact with a confirmed case. The inclusion of hospitali sed (including 

specifically ICU -admitted) patients with SARI irrespective of travel history or residence in areas with localised (or more 

widespread) transmission in the EU/EEA in the case definition is essential at this stage of the epidemic and fully supported by 

ECDC . Cases that fit the probable or confirmed criteria of the case definition sho uld be reported through TESSy. Variables 

collected are based on the WHO case reporting form [87,88] . Data have been collected since January 2020. ECDC also 

intends to start collecting data on the total number of tests performed for COVID -19 overall and the number of positive tests, 

in sentinel outpatient settings and among hospitalised patients with SARI. 

Considering that countries are rapidly progressing in their epidemics to scenarios 2 -4, the current surveillance objectives 

include: 

 monitor the intensity and geographical spread of COVID -19 in the population; 

 detect nosoc omial outbreaks; 

 identify and monitor changes in risk groups; 

 measure the impact on population and the healthcare system and to measure the impact of any mitigation measures. 

These objectives can be addressed through different s urveillance methods dependi ng on the stage of the epidemic, existence 

of surveillance systems which can be repurposed for COVID -19 surveillance , and the availability of resources. 

Surveillance of confirmed cases : although case finding based on the surveillance case definition might still be of benefit 

in areas with ongoing community transmission, limited resources for testing might mean that this cannot be comprehensive. 

Such surveillance is therefore unlikely to give a full picture of the epidemiology of COVID -19. Despite this, the data can be 

useful to assess risk groups and inform control measures. Surveillance systems should be able to capture information on 

affected healthcare workers. Surveillance of confirmed cases and national and international reporting of these data should 

therefore continue as long as possible . At this stage , it is likely that detailed reporting is not feasible and a reduced dataset 

should be used for case -based reporting at national level and in TESSy. Countries might also decide to collect aggregated 

data on confirmed cases at national level once the number of reported cases increases. T hese data can also be reported 

through TESSy. The number of samples tested for COVID -19 should also be collected. 

 Detection and assessment of community transmission: Detect ing community transmission of COVID -19 is 

challenging as the suspect case definition is based on travel links . Severe cases may present only when significant 

community transmission has already occurred and sentinel surveillance covers only a small proporti on of the 

population and might not be sensitive enough to detect ongoing low -level community transmission. Approaches to 

detect ing community transmission could include: RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

17 

 Telephone helplines: data on calls to regional/national healthcare telephone helplines could be analysed to provide 

an indication of increases of ARI/ILI regionally and nationally. Statistical methods could be used to detect changes in 

trends. The helplines could also be used to sample a proportion of cases fitting the ARI/ILI case definitio n in order to 

provide indication of community transmission of COVID -19. In situations where community transmission is suspected 

to be occurring ( e.g. SARI cases detected), the proportion of cases sampled could be increased temporarily to provide 

a more com prehensive assessment. 

 Enhanced local syndromic ILI/ARI -based surveillance: once cases are detected without links to known areas 

with community transmission, the local level of community transmission of COVID -19 should be assessed. This 

assessment should i nclude as many general practices in the defined geographical area (for example a municipality) as 

possible for a limited time period (such as two weeks). The general practices should sample a proportion of ARI/ILI 

cases irrespective of their travel history and these samples should be tested for COVID -19. Data on such 

investigations should be summarised and posted on EWRS to allow Member States to assess the risk of community 

transmission in the area. The results from these assessments can inform Member Stat es on whether contact tracing is 

still a viable response in the area. 

Sentinel syndromic and virological surveillance: with increasing transmission, it is likely that sentinel syndromic and 

virological surveillance will be come increasingly more important i n order to assess intensity and spread of infection. The 

number of outpatient sentinel sites should be increased to improve coverage of the population under syndromic surveillance. 

Data on the number of patients visiting with ILI/ARI symptoms will provide information on spread and intensity as well as 

the most affected age groups in primary care. These data should continue to be reported in TESSy according to the influenza 

protocol. Data on the number of COVID -19 tests performed and number of positive tests from sentinel surveillance should 

continue to be collected and reported in TESSy on a weekly basis within the COVID -19 reporting .

If healthcare authorities recommend that patients with ARI/ILI do not visit general practitioners, there could be a signific ant 

impact on ARI/ILI surveillance systems , and sentinel surveillance might not be suitable to monitor COVID -19 intensity and 

spread. In these circumstances, sentinel general practices consulted through telephone could report at least the number and 

propor tion of telephone consultations due to ARI/ILI. In addition, sites where ARI/ILI patients are directed and tested (e.g. 

dedicated testing centres) should be included in the surveillance, although historical data will not be available for 

comparison. Monito ring of healthcare telephone helplines as described above, ideally with linked systematic sampling could 

be an alternative or compl ementary approach. 

Depending on the resources, virological detection by RT -PCR assay could be reduced to single -gene target t esting. For the 

specimens where the first gene test is technically not interpretable or the cycle threshold value is above 35, confirmation of 

positive results should be performed by a separate gene target or repeated sampling should be performed. The subs et for 

virological characterisation including sequencing should include specimens representing different times, age groups, 

geographical areas of countr ies and different levels of clinical symptoms. If sequencing is not feasible in the short term 

during th e epidemic, the specimens should be kept for later sequencing of a subset of viruses. 

Hospital SARI surveillance: all hospitalised patients with SARI should be tested for SARS -CoV -2 virus irrespective of travel 

history in order to detect community transmi ssion, detect nosocomial outbreaks and to monitor intensity and impact. Testing 

data on SARI cases and/or ICU SARI cases should be collected , either via comprehensive surveillance or sentinel hospitals .

Data collected should include at a minimum the number of COVID -19 tests performed among patients with SARI and the 

number of positive tests. These data should be reported in TESSy on a weekly basis. Enhanced surveillance of SARI cases 

can be used to identify risk groups for COVID -19, risk factors for severe illness and poor outcome. 

Indicators for monitoring : Countries should collect basic indicators from each region on transmissibility, seriousness and 

impact of the disease [89] . Transmissibility can be based on ILI/ARI rates, seriousness on hospitalisation or ICU admission 

rates and impact on how hospitals are coping with the burden of COVID -19 infections. The assessment of the impact on 

hospitals should be based on bed occupancy levels in hospitals and intensive care units , and the capacity for ventilation , and 

could use simple indicators such as ‘capacity sufficient ’ or ‘overwhelmed ’. These indicators would inform decisions on social 

distancing and quarantine measures which would need to be taken in the context of large pressures on public health 

services. The indicators should be collated at national level and reported at EU level. 

Excess mortality surveillance: Monitoring of all -cause or specific excess mortality is essential at this stage in order to 

assess the impact of the epidemic in addition to monitoring deaths among confirmed cases .

Dissemination of surveillance data: Results from surveillance activities should be reported regularly to stakeholders and 

policy m akers in order to inform control strategies. During the initial phase, extremely high demand for information from the 

public, stakeholders and policy makers will mean that daily reports or regularly updated dashboards are required. Weekly 

surveillance repo rts should also be developed collating data from multiple surveillance sources, including ARI/ILI sentinel 

surveillance, SARI surveillance, virological surveillance, case -based surveillance (as long as this is implemented), mortality 

data and qualitative i ndicators on the burden in hospitals and intensive care units. At the EU level, similar reports will be 

produced only a weekly basis and published on the ECDC website. 

Limited resources: in general, surveillance data should continue to be collected at the most detailed level possible as long 

as capacity allows , in order to provide the best evidence for control interventions. When resources are limited, countries 

should move to more limited datasets as described above and eventually to aggregate reporting wh ere this reduces burden. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

18 

A number of countries have reported shortages of laboratory reagents and resources for COVID -19 testing. Such shortages 

could become more acute in the context of large increases in cases . In circumstances with shortages, testing c apacity should 

be reserved for more severe cases and hospital use and SARI cases. 

If there is no capacity for testing of samples from sentinel clinics, sentinel syndromic surveillance for ARI/ILI through sen tinel 

general practices and/or telephone helplin es should be used to assess the intensity and spread of infection. This might be 

challenging if influenza and/or other respiratory pathogens are co -circulating. If testing capacity remains in hospitals or 

intensive care units, then SARI/ICU surveillance sh ould be used for surveillance purposes. In the event that no testing 

capacity remains at all in hospitals, the qualitative indicators described above could be used. 

# Contact tracing 

ECDC has published a  technical report  and  algorithm  on publ ic health management of persons having had contact with 

probable and confirmed cases of COVID -19 infection [90] . ECDC have also produced a technical report for EU/EEA countries 

public health authorities with an estimation of resources required – including staff needs and coordination – for contact 

tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities [79] . The steps and resources needed are outlined in more detail in these 

documents .

The purpose of tracing COVID -19 case contacts is to identify symptomat ic contacts as early as possible for testing, isolation 

and treatment. For contact tracing purposes, a contact is defined as a person who has or may have been in contact with a 

COVID -19 case in the period from 24 hours before the onset of symptoms until th e time of diagnosis and isolation of the 

case. The classification of contacts according to high or low -risk exposure is based on the associated risk of infection that in 

turn determines the type of monitoring as defined in the ECDC technical document [90] . Data on contact tracing 

investigations should be collated and analysed at local and/or national level in order to learn from investigations and inform 

guidance. 

In scenario 2 , contact tracing, quarantining and monitoring is still a valuable part of a range of public health measures and 

should be intensified if possible . As the number of cases and their conta cts increase as the country moves towards scenario 

3, r esources may be stretched, but there is still value in tracing contacts even if not all contacts of each case are traced. This 

will help slow the spread of infection but should be applied together with other measures, such as social distancing, as these 

different strategies can have synergistic effects [91 -93] . The ECDC technical report outlines some ways to save resources 

such as using well -trained non -technica l staff, and switching to self -monitoring [79] . If resources are limited , contact tracing 

and follow -up can be prioritised , first to the hig h-risk exposure contacts of each case (close contacts) , contacts that are 

healthcare workers or work with vulnerable populations, followed by as many as possible of the low -risk exposure contacts 

[79] .

In scenarios 3 and 4 contact tracing, where possible, could still contribute to delaying the spread and reducing the pressure 

on the healthcare system , and may be prioritised according to the p rinciples outlined above . According to the WHO -China 

joint mission report, China put substantial resources into contact tracing during the outbreak [16] . Different locations within 

each country may have different tra nsmission scenarios simultaneously, and contact tracing is particularly important in newly 

infected areas and should be done as extensively as possible here [94] .

With r egards to contact tracing of healthcare workers, a s community transmission becomes more widespread and exposure 

of HCW s more frequent, countries should consider that resources may be better spent on other infection prevention and 

control activities in the healthcare setting. In this scenario , healthcare facilities can move towards more routine practices with 

regular self - or active monitoring of all healthcare workers for symptoms [95] .

Please refer to the ECDC  technical report  and  algorithm  on public health management of persons having had contact with 

proba ble and confirmed cases of COVID -19 infection for further details on the specifics of contact tracing, isolation and 

monitoring for contacts, including specific guidance for healthcare workers [90] .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

19 

# 5 Substances of human origin safety 

Threats and risks posed by COVID -19 to the safety and sustainability of substances of human origin (SoHO) supply as well as 

response measures stay the same as assessed in the fifth update of  ECDC rapid risk assessment . In the situation of 

increased spread of COVID -19 and extensive public health measures in the EU/EEA, SoHO authorities and establishments 

should focus and prioriti se their efforts in managing the national SoHO supply. In this respect and in accordance with 

previously suggested principles [96] , countries should: 

 Ensure the inclusion of the SoHO national competent authorities (NCA) and/or establishment representati ves in the 

national COVID -19 outbreak contingency planning body. 

 Establish a mechanism for the SoHO NCAs and establishments to receive regular, up -to -date epidemiological 

information on the spread of COVID -19 in the country and abroad. Daily outbreak situa tion updates are available at 

the ECDC internet page for  EU/EEA Members States and UK  and for  count ries worldwide .

 Develop national/regional contingency plans for blood cells and tissues supply, which is reviewed constantly, 

regarding: 

 Risk of transmission of COVID -19 by SoHO which remains theoretical but cannot be completely excluded. 

 Temporary loss o f donors resulting in a reduced supply. Donors may be unable to donate because of having 

COVID -19, the isolation or self -isolation after contact with confirmed case of COVID -19, work commitments, 

restricted public transportation, the need to care for famil y members, or reluctance to donate due to fear of 

being infected. Organi sing blood drives may be discouraged as part of measures to prevent people gathering. 

COVID -19 specific donor selection criteria could also in some extent contribute to the decrease in collections. 

Despite possible measures taken to reduce the mobility of persons, blood donation and blood collection are 

essential activities for the national health services; blood donation should preferably be made by appointment. 

 Temporary loss of staff due to COVID -19. It is anticipated that absenteeism during a COVID -19 outbreak will 

be higher than routine daily absenteeism, although the magnitude of absenteeism will depend on the on the 

local magnitude of an outbreak. 

 Changes in the clinical demand f or blood and blood products, cells and tissues, reduction in demand due to a 

probable reduction in elective healthcare and postponing non -essential cells and tissues therapies. 

Implementation of Patient blood management (PBM), thorough evaluation of the ap propriateness of blood 

component requests and a reduction of elective (which can be postponed as non -essential) surgery/healthcare 

with medium -high consumption of blood components is strongly advisable .

 Work with national health authorities, hospitals and other responsible bodies to determine and monitor 

expected blood, plasma -derived medicinal products, cells and tissues usage during COVID -19 outbreak and to 

plan donation activities accordingly. 

 Changes in the local and general epidemiological situation i n the country. 

 Support SoHO establishments in developing and implementing business continuity plans (BCP) related to COVID -19 

outbreak. The BCP objectives may consider: 

 Activate the BCP and set up a Business Continuity Management Team (BCMT) representati ve of the ke y

functions and decision makers. Nominate a point of contact and a deputy with the Health Service and other 

agencies. This could be the Risk Manager. 

 Implement measures to r educe transmission of the COVID -19 among employees, customers/clients, and 

partners .

 Minimise illness among employees .

 Maintain critical operations and services by :

- Review ing stocks of critical supplies and increase supplies where possible 

- Regularly check with contingency partners to ensure that they can fulfil their commit ments 

- Changing how staff are deployed, i.e. arrangements in offices/laboratories, cease non - essential 

meetings, minimise gatherings of s taff, have meetings by teleconf erence even when in the same building, 

review catering arrangements and stagger staff dining, look at split shifts in the laboratories especially 

where there is no external contingency in place with no crossover to minimise the risk of passing on the 

virus, have as many of the critical staff work from home if that is possible, retrain staff to provide extra 

cover, bring back recently retired staff if necessary to fill essential roles, cease non -essential travel etc. 

 Communicate regularly with staff so that they feel assured that the situation is being managed and that you 

will inform them as the situation changes. Staff should be clearly informed about procedures after a direct 

contact with staff who tested positive for COVID -19 as well as need for self -isolation and social distancing. 

 Minimise social disruptions and the economic impact of th e outbreak. 

 Communication between SoHO establishments, NCA, national health authorities, ECDC and European Commission is 

essential to facilitate adequate and proportional response to COVID -19 outbreak at local, national and EU/EEA level. 

The alert platform s hosted by the European Commission for communication between Member States’ SoHO 

authorities, R ap id Alert Blood (RAB) and Rapid Alert Tissues and C ells (RATC) platforms may be used for the 

communication between NCAs, EU commission and ECDC in order to sha re data on implemented measures and 

difficulties in supply. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

20 

According to the previous ECDC risk assessment and in the absence of evidence of COVID -19 transmission through organ 

transplantation, precautionary measures should be applied to prevent possible t ransmission to recipients, organ procurement 

and patient treating personnel . Deceased donors who have died with COVID -19 are not eligible for organ donation. Living 

organ donors potentially exposed to risk of being infected due to travel to area or being i n contact with COVID -19 case 

should be tested for the presence of the virus or deferred from donation for 14 days after exposure. After recovery form 

COVID -19 disease, living donors are eligible for donation if tested negative or 14 days after recovery. Ad ditionally, organ 

transplantation authorities should develop measures for management of organ recipients with COVID -19, procedures when 

the transplant centre is temporarily closed, isolation of recipients if transplanted during a potential incubation perio d or in an 

area with sustained community transmission country in order to protect the patient, family and hospital personnel. It is also 

important to keep uninterrupted national and international transportation of organs and other cells and tissues intende d for 

transplantation. 

# 6 Research needs 

In the current situation of the outbreak it is crucial to investigate the availability and impact of countermeasures for public 

health actions and clinical management. Research on most affected populations or risk g roups are also required to improve 

case management for the prevention of severe and fatal outcomes. It is important to understand the relative efficiency and 

relevance of the different modes of transmissions (e.g. droplets versus airborne, surfaces, or fae cal -oral). Molecular studies 

could shed more light on disease dynamics and COVID -19 evolution and spread . Prevention and control measures include 

the development of vaccines and antiviral treatment options, which also have an implication on the management of cases 

and clinical measures. Several clinical trials for different products and pharmaceutical substances are currently conducted, 

which require continuous funding and harmonised approaches. To boost global preparedness, prevention and containment of 

th e virus, new funding worth €232 million will be allocated to different sectors from the European Commission [97] . The 

European Commission funds the EU research and innovation programme up to €45 million of the Innovative Medicines 

Initiative fast track call for research proposals in response to the COVID -19 outbreak [98] . ECDC is in collaboration or will 

establish collaboration with projects such as Rapid European COVID -19 Emergency research Respons e (ReCoVer) , and I -

Move .

Available study protocols to conduct ‘First few hundred’, household transmission or other studies are available from WHO and 

should be applied. Results should be made available as soon as possible. 

Engagement and efforts should al so include serological studies to analyse the impact on a population level and compare with 

potential pre -existing immunity in the population. Such studies require sensitive and reliable serological tests, which are 

currently under development requiring va lidation. Study protocols are currently being developed and should be conducted in 

a harmonised way across the EU/EEA. 

The assessment of the effectiveness of PPE in various settings will help provide more evidence regarding the prevention of 

transmission in healthcare settings and in particular how to protect healthcare workers. 

Finally, modelling studies assessing effectiveness of interventions and policies aimed at delaying disease transmission could 

be of key importance to support decision -making and spare hospital capacity. 

# 7 Limitations 

This assessment is undertaken based on facts known to ECDC at the time of publication. There is substantial uncertainty 

regarding the epidemiological characteristics of the COVID -19. There is limited epidemiological an d clinical information on the 

cases of COVID -19 identified so far (e.g. efficiency of different modes of transmission, proportion of mild and asymptomatic 

cases, transmission during incubation and recovery period, effectiveness of treatment regimes , risk f actors for severe illness 

besides age , effective preventive measures). Given these limitations, ECDC will revise the current risk assessment as soon as more 

information becomes available. 

# 8 Source and date of request 

ECDC internal decision, 9 March 2020. 

# 9 Consulted experts 

ECDC experts (in alphabetic order): Cornelia Adlhoch, Leonidas Alexakis, Agoritsa Baka, Eeva Broberg, Sergio Brusin, Julien 

Beaute, Nick Bundle, Mike Catchpole, Orlando Cenciarelli, Scott Chiossi, Edoard o Colzani, Angelo D'Ambrosio, Ste fania De Angelis, 

Dragoslav Domanovic, Erika Duffell, Margot Einöder -Moreno, Emilie Finch, Joana Gomes Dias, Silvia Funke, Josep Jansa, 

Helen Johnson , Tommi Karki, John Kinsman , Vicky Lefevre , Katrin Leitmeyer, Felix Lotsch, Angeliki Melidou, Thomas Mollet ,

Otilia Mårdh, Lina Nerlander, Teymur Noori, Daniel Palm, Pasi Penttinen, Anastasia Pharris, Diamantis Plachouras, Emmanuel 

Robesyn, Senia Rosales -Klintz, Andreea Salajan, Gianfranco Spiteri, Carl Suetens .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

21 

# 10 Disclaimer 

ECDC issues this risk assessment do cument based on an internal decision and in accordance with Article 10 of Decision No 

1082/13/EC and Article 7(1) of Regulation (EC) No 851/2004 establishing a European centre for disease prevention and 

control (ECDC). In the framework of ECDC’s mandate, t he specific purpose of an ECDC risk assessment is to present different 

options on a certain matter. The responsibility on the choice of which option to pursue and which actions to take, including 

the adoption of mandatory rules or guidelines, lies exclusiv ely with the EU/EEA Member States. In its activities, ECDC strives 

to ensure its independence, high scientific quality, transparency and efficiency. 

This report was written with the coordination and assistance of an Internal Response Team at the European Centre for 

Disease Prevention and Control. All data published in this risk assessment are correct to the best of our knowledge at the 

time of publication. Maps and figures published do not represent a statement on the part of ECDC or its partners on the le gal 

or border status of the countries and territories shown. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

22 

# Annex 1 . Scenarios to describe progression of 

# COVID -19 outbreaks 

The following five scenarios, adapted from ECDC’s strategic analysis, are used to describe the possible progression of the 

COV ID -19 outbreak in EU/EEA countries. 

Scenario 0 describes a situation with no reported cases in the country and multiple introductions and/or community 

transmission elsewhere in Europe. At this stage, the main objective for public health measures should be to enable rapid 

detection and isolation of individual cases to prevent domestic transmission chains, and to prepare for the response once 

cases are detected in the country. 

Scenario 1 describes a situation with multiple introductions but limited local tr ansmission in the country. Despite the 

introductions there is no apparent sustained transmission (only second generation cases observed or transmission within 

sporadic contained clusters with known epidemiological links). In this situation, the objective is containment of the outbreak 

by blocking transmission opportunities, through early detection of imported and locally -transmitted COVID -19 cases in order 

to try to avoid or at least delay the spread of infection and the associated burden on healthcare syst ems. Delaying the start 

of local transmission will allow the current influenza season to end, freeing up some healthcare capacity. 

Scenario 2 describes a situation with increasing number of introductions and of more widespread reports of localised 

human -to-human transmission in the country (more than two generations of cases outside of sporadic clusters with known 

epidemiological links). In this situation, the objective remains to contain where practicable and otherwise slow down the 

transmission of the in fection. This will increase the time available for development, production and distribution of PPE and 

effective therapeutic options, and would play a crucial role in reducing the burden on the healthcare system and other 

sectors, particularly if wider tra nsmission of COVID -19 is delayed beyond the ongoing influenza season. A reduced burden 

would also allow for more time to increase laboratory capacity, and increase surge capacity in healthcare services. All these 

measures will facilitate effective treatmen t of infected patients [44]. Rapid collection and analysis of epidemiological and 

virological data will enable targeting of measures in this scenario and later. 

Scenario 3 describes a situation with localised outbreaks, which start to merge becoming indis tinct. In this scenario, there is 

sustained human -to -human transmission in the country (more than two generations of cases outside of sporadic clusters 

with known epidemiological links) and an increasing pressure on healthcare systems. The objective at thi s stage is to 

mitigate the impact of the outbreak by decreasing the burden on healthcare systems and protect populations at risk of 

severe disease. At the same time, operational research should guide developing better and more efficient diagnostic and 

trea tment options. 

Scenario 4 describes a situation with widespread sustained transmission where healthcare systems are over -burdened due 

to a large demand for emergency healthcare services, a strained ICU capacity, overworked healthcare workers and reduced 

staff availability due to illness, lack of PPE and lack of diagnostic testing capacity. The objective at this stage is still to 

mitigate the impact of the outbreak, decrease the burden on healthcare services, protect populations at risk of severe 

disease an d reduce excess mortality. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

23 

# Annex 2 

Table. COVID -19 14 -day cumulative notification per 100 000 population by country as per 11 March 2020 and 

prevalence levels associated with a > 90% risk of saturation of ICU beds 

Number of 

COVID -19 cases ,

11 March 20 20 

Max 1 4-day cumulative 

notification/ 100 000 

population  (1) 

Prevalence of hospitalised cases 

per 100 000 population associated 

with >90% risk of excess of ICU 

capacity  (2)

Austria  182  2.03  17.7 [10.6, 58.1] 

Belgium  267  2.33  24.1 [14.6, 78.1] 

Bulgaria  4 0.06  49.7 [30.3, 160.4] 

Croatia  13  0.29  20 [11.7, 67.1] 

Cyprus  2 0.17  36.1 [20.3, 127.6] 

Czech Republic  63  0.59  40.4 [24.8, 130] 

Denmark  264  4.55  ND 

Estonia  13  0.98  21.1 [11.7, 74.9] 

Finland  40  0.71  18.2 [10.7, 60.7] 

France  1 784  2.64  8.2 [5, 26.1] 

Germany  1 296  1.54  19.1 [11.9, 60.3] 

Greece  90  0.84  16.2 [9.8, 53.1] 

Hungary  12  0.12  20.1 [12.1, 65.5] 

Iceland  70  19.80  39.8 [21, 149] 

Ireland  35  0.72  5.6 [3.1, 20] 

Italy  10 149  16.26  11.7 [7.2, 37.1] 

Latvia  8 0.42  27.1 [15.7, 93.2] 

Liechtenstein  1 2.64  ND 

Lithuania  3 0.11  26.4 [15.4, 89.1] 

Luxembourg  7 1.15  50.7 [28.3, 179] 

Malta  4 0.83  15.2 [7.5, 60.4] 

Netherlands  382  2.22  9.3 [5.6, 30.6] 

Norway  277  5.21  14.6 [8.6, 49.3] 

Poland  22  0.06  11.9 [7.3, 38] 

Portugal  41  0.40  11.3 [6.7, 37.4] 

Roma nia  25  0.13  45.7 [28.2, 145.3] 

Slovakia  7 0.13  65.2 [39.8, 210.6] 

Slovenia  31  1.50  18 [10.1, 62.8] 

Spain  1639  3.49  17.8 [11, 56.7] 

Sweden  326  3.19  ND 

United Kingdom  373  0.54  6.7 [4.1, 21.5] 

Total  17 430  3.28  NA 

(1)  The 14 -days cumulative notificatio n rate per 100 000 population reflects the number of active COVID -19 cases per 100 000 population 

(proxy of  COVID -19 prevalence) and the pressure on the healthcare system,  even though the proportion of hospitalised cases is unknown 

and varies strongly by c ountry due to differences in diagnostic testing  policies ; (2)  Prevalence of hospitalised cases per 100 000 population 

associated with >90% risk of excess of ICU capacity  based on modelling performed by ECDC (see text in disease background chapter); 

prevale nce figures per 100 000  are given for  three levels of hospitalised patients requiring ICU  care : 18% [30% –5%].  NA:  no data. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

24 

# References 

1. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). COVID -19 2020 [cited 2020 1 March]. A vailable from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel -coronavirus -china .

2. European Commission (EC). COVID -19 [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from: 

https://ec.europa.eu/health/coronavirus_en .

3. World Health Organization (WHO). Coronavirus disease (COVID -19) outbreak [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from: 

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel -coronavirus -2019 .

4. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Event background COVID -19 [cited 2020 1 March]. 

Available from:  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel -coronavirus/event -background -2019 .

5. Santé publique France. Infection au nouveau Coronavirus (SARS -CoV -2), COVID -19, France et Monde 2020 [cited 2020 

1 March].  Available from:  https://www.santepubliquefrance.fr/maladies -et -traumatismes/ maladies -et -infections -

respiratoires/infection -a-coronavirus/articles/infection -au -nouveau -coronavirus -sars -cov -2-covid -19 -france -et -monde .

6. Folkhälsomyndigheten. Flera tecken på samhällsspridning av covid -19 i Sverige 2020 [cited 2020 March 10]. Availa ble 

from:  https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/nyheter -och -press/nyhetsarkiv/2020/mars/flera -tecken -pa -

samhal lsspridning -av -covid -19 -i-sverige/ .

7. Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu. Actuele informatie over het nieuwe coronavirus (COVID -19) 2020 [cited 

2020 March 10]. Available from:  https://www.rivm.nl/nieuws/actuele -informatie -over -coronavirus .

8. Sciensano. PUBLIC HEALTH EVENT FOLLOW UP: COVID -19 - 10/03/20 2020 [cited 2020 March 10]. Available from: 

https://epidemio.wiv -

isp.be/ID/Documents/Covid19/Derni%c3%a8re%20mise%20%c3%a0%20jour%20de%20la%20situation%20%c3%a9 

pid%c3%a9miologique.pdf .

9. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19): 

situation in Italy 2020 [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel -coronavirus -threat -assessment -brief -23 -feb -2020.pdf .

10. Ministero della Salute. Covid -19 - Situazione nel mondo 2020 [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from: 

http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/nuovocoronavirus/dettaglioContenutiNuovoCoronavirus.jsp?lingua=italiano&id= 5338&a 

rea=nuovoCoronavirus&menu=vuoto .

11. Public Health - Seattle & King County. Press release: Update: King County COVID -19 case numbers for March 9, 2020 

and information about testing - King County. 2020. 

12. Louveciennes, France. Press release: COVID 19 : Point sur la situation. 2020. 

13. Micalessin G. "È uno tsunami. E muoiono lucidi". il Giornale:  https://wwwilgiornaleit/news/politica/tsunami -e-muoiono -

lucidi -1838892html . 2020 March 11, 2020. 

14. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Situation update worldwide [cited 2020 1 March]. 

Available from:  https: //www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/geographical -distribution -2019 -ncov -cases .

15. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Disease background of COVID -19 [cited 2020 1 March]. 

Available from:  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/2019 -ncov -background -disease .

16. World Health Organization (WHO). Report of the WHO -China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) 

2020 [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from:  https://www.who.int/docs/default -source/coronaviruse/who -china -joint -

mission -on -covid -19 -final -report.pdf .

17. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Pre vention. Epidemic update and risk assessment of 2019 Novel Coronavirus 

2020 [updated 29 January 2020; cited 2020 29 February]. Available from: 

http://www.chinacdc.cn/yyrdgz/2020 01/P020200128523354919292.pdf .

18. Backer JA, Klinkenberg D, Wallinga J. Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019 -nCoV) infections among 

travellers from Wuhan, China, 20 –28 January 2020. Eurosurveillance. 2020;25(5). 

19. Chinese Center for Diseas e Control and Prevention. The Epidemiological Characteristics of an Outbreak of 2019 Novel 

Coronavirus Diseases (COVID -19) — China, 2020 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

http://www.ourphn.org.au/wp -content/uploads/20200225 -Article -COVID -19.pdf .

20. Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS). Epidemia COVID -19: Aggiornamento nazionale - 09 marzo 2020 – ore 16:00: ISS; 

[March 11, 2020]. Available from:  https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Bollettino -sorveglianza -integrata -

COVID -19_09 -marzo -2020.pdf .

21. Report on the Epidemiologica l Features of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) Outbreak in the Republic of Korea 

from January 19 to March 2, 2020. J Korean Med Sci. 2020 3/;35(10). 

22. Woelfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Mueller MA, et al. Clinical presentation and virological 

assessment of hospitalized cases of coronavirus disease 2019 in a travel -associated transmission cluster. medRxiv. 

2020:2020.03.05.20030502. 

23. Young BE, Ong SWX, Kalimuddin S, Low JG, Tan SY, Loh J, et al. Epidemiologic Features and Clinical Course of Patients 

Infected With SARS -CoV -2 in Singapore. JAMA. 2020. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

25 

24. Chang L, Yan Y, Wang L. Coronavirus Disease 2019: Coronaviruses and Blood Safety. Transfusion Medicine Reviews. 

2020 2020/02/21/. 

25. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in 

Wuhan, China. The Lancet. 2020 2020/02/15/;395(10223):497 -506. 

26. To KK -W, Tsang OT -Y, Yip CC -Y, Chan K -H, Wu T -C, Chan JM -C, et al. Consistent Detection of 2019 Novel Coronavirus 

in Saliva. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020. 

27. Peng L, Liu J, Xu W, Luo Q, Deng K, Lin B, et al. 2019 Novel Coronavirus can be detected in urine, blood, anal swabs 

and oropharyngeal swabs samples. medRxiv. 2020:2020.02.21.20026179. 

28. Fei Zhou* TY, Ron ghui Du*, Guohui Fan*, Ying Liu*, Zhibo Liu*, Jie Xiang*, Yeming Wang, Bin Song, Xiaoying Gu, Lulu 

Guan, Yuan Wei, Hui Li, Xudong Wu, Jiuyang Xu, Shengjin Tu, Yi Zhang, Hua Chen, Bin Cao,. Clinical course and risk 

factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID -19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. The Lancet. 2020 

March 9, 2020. 

29. Cai J, Xu J, Lin D, Yang z, Xu L, Qu Z, et al. A Case Series of children with 2019 novel coronavirus infection: clinical and 

epidemiological features. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020. 

30. Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the 2019 -

nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. The Lancet. 2020. 

31. Riou J, Althaus CL. Pattern of early human -to -human transmission of Wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus (2019 -nCoV), 

December 2019 to January 2020. Eurosurveillance. 2020;25(4). 

32. Zhang S, Diao M, Yu W, Pei L, Lin Z, Chen D. Estimation of the reproductive number of novel coronavirus (COV ID -19) 

and the probable outbreak size on the Diamond Princess cruise ship: A data -driven analysis. International Journal of 

Infectious Diseases. 2020 2020/04/01/;93:201 -4. 

33. National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Japan. Field Briefing: Diamond Prince ss COVID -19 Cases, 20 Feb Update 2020 

[March 10, 2020]. Available from:  https://www.niid.go.jp/niid/en/2019 -ncov -e/9417 -covid -dp -fe -02.html .

34. Istituto Superiore di Sanit à. Sorveglianza Integrata COVID -19 in Italia [February 27, 2020]. Available from: 

https://www.iss.it/documents/20126/0/Infografica_09marzo.pdf/ .

35. Ministry of Health LaW, , Ja pan. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) situation within and outside the country. Minstry 

of Health, Labour and Welfare,, Japan; 2020. 

36. Hoehl S, Rabenau H, Berger A, Kortenbusch M, Cinatl J, Bojkova D, et al. Evidence of SARS -CoV -2 Infection in 

Returni ng Travelers from Wuhan, China. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020. 

37. Pan X, Chen D, Xia Y, Wu X, Li T, Ou X, et al. Asymptomatic cases in a family cluster with SARS -CoV -2 infection. The 

Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020 2020/02/19/. 

38. Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, Liang L, Huang H, Hong Z, et al. SARS -CoV -2 Viral Load in Upper Respiratory Specimens of 

Infected Patients. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020. 

39. Luo S -H, Liu W, Liu Z -J, Zheng X -Y, Hong C -X, Liu Z -R, et al. A confirmed asymptomatic carrier of 2019 novel 

coronavirus (SARS -CoV -2). Chinese Medical Journal. 9000;Publish Ahead of Print. 

40. Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin D -Y, Chen L, et al. Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID -19.  JAMA. 

2020. 

41. Ganyani T, Kremer C, Chen D, Torn eri A, Faes C, Wallinga J, et al.  Estimating the generation interval for COVID -19 

based on symptom onset data. medRxiv. 2020:2020.03.05.20031815. 

42. Nishiura H, Linton NM, Akhmetzhanov AR. Serial interval of novel coronavirus (COVID -19) infections. Intern ational 

Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2020 2020/03/04/. 

43. Liang W, Guan W, Chen R, Wang W, Li J, Xu K, et al. Cancer patients in SARS -CoV -2 infection: a nationwide analysis in 

China. The Lancet Oncology. 2020 2020/03/01/;21(3):335 -7. 

44. Chen N, Zhou M , Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 

novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. The Lancet. 2020 2020/02/15/;395(10223):507 -13. 

45. Cai G. Bulk and single -cell transcr iptomics identify tobacco -use disparity in lung gene expression of ACE2, the receptor 

of 2019 -nCov. medRxiv. 2020:2020.02.05.20020107. 

46. Cai G. Tobacco -Use Disparity in Gene Expression of ACE2, the Receptor of 2019 -nCov. Preprint 2020. Preprints 2020, 

20 20020051. 2020. 

47. Chen YS, K.; Qian, W. Asians Do Not Exhibit Elevated Expression or Unique Genetic Polymorphisms for ACE2, the Cell -

Entry Receptor of SARS -CoV -2. Preprints 2020, 2020020258. 2020. 

48. Mengyuan Li LL, Yue Zhang, Xiaosheng Wang. An Investi gation of the Expression of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Cell 

Receptor Gene ACE2 in a Wide Variety of Human Tissues (Preprint). Research Square. 2020. 

49. Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, Luo F, Yu X, Zhang W, et al. Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical tran smission 

potential of COVID -19 infection in nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical records. The Lancet. 2020 

2020/03/07/;395(10226):809 -15. 

50. Kam K -q, Yung CF, Cui L, Lin Tzer Pin R, Mak TM, Maiwald M, et al. A Well Infant with Coronaviru s Disease 2019 

(COVID -19) with High Viral Load. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020. RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

26 

51. Bi Q, Wu Y, Mei S, Ye C, Zou X, Zhang Z, et al. Epidemiology and Transmission of COVID -19 in Shenzhen China: 

Analysis of 391 cases and 1,286 of their close contacts. me dRxiv. 2020:2020.03.03.20028423. 

52. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Point prevalence survey of healthcareassociated infections 

and antimicrobial use in European acute care hospitals. Stockholm: ECDC; 2013 [March 11, 2020]. Avail able from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/media/en/publications/Publications/healthc are -associated -infections -

antimicrobial -use -PPS.pdf .

53. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Operational tool on rapid risk assessment methodology: 

ECDC; 2019. Available from:  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/operational -tool -rapid -risk -

assessment -methodolgy -ecdc -2019.pdf .

54. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Contro l (ECDC) and World Health Organization (WHO) Europe. Flu News 

Europe 2020 [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from:  https://flunewseurope.org/ .

55. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Guidelines for the use of non -pharmaceutical measures to 

delay and mitigate the impact of 2019 -nCoV 2020. Available from: 

https://w ww.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel -coronavirus -guidelines -non -pharmaceutical -

measures_0.pdf .

56. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19): 

increased transmission gl obally – fifth update, 2 March 2020: ECDC; 2020. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/site s/default/files/documents/RRA -outbreak -novel -coronavirus -disease -2019 -increase -

transmission -globally -COVID -19.pdf .

57. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Personal protective equipment (PPE) needs in healthcare 

settings for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed novel coronavirus (2019 -nCoV) 2020. Available from: 

https://www.e cdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel -coronavirus -personal -protective -equipment -needs -

healthcare -settings.pdf .

58. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Health emergency preparedness for imported cases of 

high -consequence infectious diseases 2019 [17 January 2020]. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications -data/hea lth -emergency -preparedness -imported -cases -high -consequence -

infectious -diseases .

59. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Checklist for hospitals preparing for the reception and 

care of coronavirus 2019 (COVID -19) patients.: ECDC; 202 0 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid -19 -che cklist -hospitals -preparing -reception -care -

coronavirus -patients.pdf .

60. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Infection prevention and control for the care of patients 

with novel coronavirus in healthcare settings – 1st Update (In pre ss): ECDC; 2020. 

61. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Interim Guidance for Businesses and Employers to Plan and Respond 

to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19), February 2020 2020 [updated 26 February 2020; cited 2020 1 March]. 

Available fr om:  https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/specific -groups/guidance -business -response.html .

62. World Health Organization (WHO). Infection preventi on and control - My 5 Moments for Hand Hygiene [cited 2020 1 

March]. Available from:  https://www.who.int/infection -prevention/campaigns/clean -hands/5moments/en/ .

63. World Health Organization (WHO). Home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection 

presenting with mild symptoms and management of contacts. Interim guidance. 2020 [updated January 20]. Available 

from:  https://www.who.int/publications -detail/home -care -for -patients -with -suspected -novel -coronavirus -(nc ov) -

infection -presenting -with -mild -symptoms -and -management -of -contacts .

64. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Infection prevention and control for the care of patients 

with 2019 -nCoV in healthcare settings 2020. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/nove -coronavirus -infection -prevention -control -pati ents -

healthcare -settings.pdf .

65. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Guidance for wearing and removing personal protective 

equipment in healthcare settings for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID -19 2020 [cited 2 020 1 

March]. Available from:  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications -data/guidance -wearing -and -removing -perso nal -

protective -equipment -healthcare -settings .

66. World Health Organization (WHO). Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -

19): Interim guidance - 27 February 2020 Geneva: WHO; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available fro m: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331215/WHO -2019 -nCov -IPCPPE_use -2020.1 -eng.pdf .

67. World Health Organization (WHO). Shortag e of personal protective equipment endangering health workers worldwide: 

WHO; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from:  https://www.who.int/news -room/detail/03 -03 -2020 -shortage -of -

personal -protective -equipment -endangering -health -workers -worldwide .

68. World Health Organisation (WHO). Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -

19) 2 020 [updated 27 February 2020; cited 2020 8 March]. Available from: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331215/WHO -2019 -nCov -IPCPPE_ use -2020.1 -eng.pdf .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

27 

69. World Health Organization (WHO). Infection prevention and control of epidemic - and pandemic -prone acute respiratory 

infections in health care Geneva: WHO; 2014 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/112656/9789241507134_eng.pdf;jsessionid=BE25F8EAA4F631126E78 

390906 .

70. European Centre for Disease Prevention a nd Control (ECDC). Interim guidance for environmental cleaning in non -

healthcare facilities exposed to SARS -CoV -2 2020 [cited 2020 March]. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/coronavirus -SARS -CoV -2-guidance -environmental -cleaning -

non -healthcare -facilities.pdf 

71. World Health Organisation (WHO). Home care for patie nts with suspected novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection 

presenting with mild symptoms and management of contacts 2020 [updated 4 February 2020; cited 2020 8 March]. 

Available from:  https://www.who.int/publications -detail/home -care -for -patients -with -suspected -novel -coronavirus -

(ncov) -infection -presenting -with -mild -symptoms -and -management -of -contacts .

72. Lai S, Ruktanonchai NW, Zhou L, Prosper O, Luo W, Floyd JR, et al. Effect of non -pharmaceutical interventions for 

containing the COVID -19 outbreak: an observational and modelling study. medRxiv. 2020:2020.03.03.20029843. 

73. Wor ld Health Organization (WHO). Non -pharmaceutical public health measures for mitigating the risk and impact of 

epidemic and pandemic influenza 2019 [cited 2020 1 March]. Available from: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/329438/9789241516839 -eng.pdf?ua=1 .

74. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Novel coronavirus (SARS -CoV -2): Discharge criteria for 

confirmed COVID -19 cases – When is it safe to discharge COVID -19 cases from the hospital or end home isolation? : 

ECDC; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from:  https://www.ecdc.eu ropa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/COVID -19 -

Discharge -criteria.pdf .

75. World Health Organization (WHO). Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection when novel coronavirus 

(nCoV) infection is suspected 2020 [17 January 2020]. Available fr om:  https://www.who.int/publications -detail/clinical -

management -of -severe -acute -respirator y-infection -when -novel -coronavirus -(ncov) -infection -is -suspected .

76. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with 

Confirmed Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) 2020 [updated 25 February 2020; cited 2020 1]. March]. Available 

from:  https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/hcp/clinical -guidance -management -patients.html .

77. Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: 

implications for virus origins and receptor binding. The Lancet. 2020 2020/02/22/;395(10224):565 -74. 

78. Lee VJ, Lye DC, Wilder -Smith A. Combination strateg ies for pandemic influenza response -a systematic review of 

mathematical modeling studies. BMC medicine. 2009;7(1):76. 

79. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and 

monitoring activiti es in the EU/EEA 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications -data/resourc e-estimation -contact -tracing -quarantine -and -monitoring -

activities -covid -19 .

80. Quilty BJ, Clifford S, group2 Cnw, Flasche S, Eggo RM. Effectiveness of airport screening at detecting travellers infected 

with novel coronavirus (2019 -nCoV). Eurosurveillance . 2020;25(5):2000080. 

81. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Interim guidance for environmental cleaning in non -

healthcare facilities exposed to 2019 -nCoV 2020. Available from: 

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel -coronavirus -guidance -environmental -cleaning -non -

healthcare -facilities.pdf .

82. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Laboratory support by specialised laboratories in the 

EU/EEA 2020 [updated 8 February 2020; cited 2020 1 March]. Available from:  ht tps://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel -

coronavirus/laboratory -support .

83. World Health Organization (WHO). Laboratory testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) in suspected human 

cases: Interim guidance - 2 March 2020, : WHO; 2020 [11 March, 2020]. Avai lable from: 

https://www.who.int/publications -detail/laboratory -testing -for -2019 -novel -coronavirus -in -suspected -human -case s-

20200117 .

84. World Health Organization (WHO). Laboratory biosafety guidance related to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19); 

Interim guidance 12 February 2020. [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331138/WHO -WPE -GIH -2020.1 -eng.pdf .

85. World Health Organization (WHO). Global Surveillance for human infection with novel coronavirus (2019 -nCoV): Interim 

guidance - 27 February 2020 2020 [March 11, 20202020]. Available from:  https://www.who.int/publications -

detail/global -surveillance -for -hu man -infection -with -novel -coronavirus -(2019 -ncov ). 

86. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Case definition and European surveillance for human 

infection with novel coronavirus (2019 -nCoV) 2020. Available from:  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/case -definition -

and -european -surveillance -human -infection -novel -coronavirus -2019 -ncov .

87. World Health Organization (WHO). Interim case reporting form for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019 -nCoV) of confirmed 

and probable cases 2020 [cited 2020 29 February]. Available from:  https://www.who.int/docs/default -

source/coronaviruse/20200121 -2019 -ncov -reporting -form.pdf .RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -2019) pandemic: increased transmission in the EU/EEA – sixth update 

28 

88. World Health Organization (WHO). Revised case report form for confirmed Novel Coronavirus COVID -19 ( report to WHO 

within 48 hours of case identification) Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331234/WHO -2019 -nCoV -SurveillanceCRF -2020.2 -eng.pdf .

89. World Health Organization (WHO). Pandemic Influenza Severity Assessment (PISA): A WHO guide to assess the 

severity of influenza epidemics and pandemics. Geneva2017. Available from: 

https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259392/WHO -WHE -IHM -GIP -2017.2 -

eng.pdf;jsessionid=614D77C9474EFF4ECBE33EE0886261D8?se quence=1 .

90. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Public health management of persons, including 

healthcare workers, having had contact with COVID -19 cases in the European Union 2020 [March 1, 2020]. Available 

from:  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid -19 -public -health -management -contact -novel -

coronavirus -cases -EU.p df .

91. Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, Bosse NI, Jarvis CI, Russell TW, et al. Feasibility of controlling COVID -19 outbreaks by 

isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global Health. 2020 2020/02/28/. 

92. Keeling MJ, Hollingsworth TD, Read JM. The Ef ficacy of Contact Tracing for the Containment of the 2019 Novel 

Coronavirus (COVID -19). medRxiv. 2020:2020.02.14.20023036. 

93. Peak CM, Kahn R, Grad YH, Childs LM, Li R, Lipsitch M, et al. Modeling the Comparative Impact of Individual Quarantine 

vs. Active Monitoring of Contacts for the Mitigation of COVID -19. medRxiv. 2020:2020.03.05.20031088. 

94. World Health Organization (WHO). Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID -19: Interim 

guidance 7 March 2020: WHO; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. A vailable from:  https://www.who.int/docs/default -

source/coronaviruse/20200307 -cccc -guidance -table -covid -19 -final.pdf?sfvrs n=1c8ee193_10 .

95. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Interim U.S. Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public Health 

Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients with Coronavirus 

Disease (COVID -19): March 7, 2020: CDC; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/hcp/guidance -risk -assesment -hcp.html .

96. World Health Organization (WHO). Maintaining a Safe and Adequate Blood Supply during Pandemic Influenza; 

Guidelines for Blood Transfusion services (July 2011): WHO; 2011 [March 11, 2020]. Available from: 

https://www.who.int/bloodsafety/publications/WHO_Guidelines_on_Pandemic_Influenza_and_Blood_Supply.pdf .

97. European Commission (EC). The EU's Response to COVID -19: European Commission; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available 

from:  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_20_307 .

98. European Commission (EC). COVID -19: Horizon 2020 partly fundi ng Innovative Medicines Initiative fast track call: 

European Commission; 2020 [March 11, 2020]. Available from:  https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/covid19 -horizon -2020 -

partly -funding -innovative -medicines -initiative -fast -track -call -2020 -mar -03_en .
