# The Influences of Chernyshevsky, Tkachev, and Nechaev on the Political Thought of V.I. Lenin

THE INFLITENCES OF CHERNYSHEVSKY, TKA,CHEV, AI'ID 

NECHAEV ON TIIE 

POLTTTCAL THOUGHT OF V.I. LETITIN THE INFLUENCES OF CHERNySHEVSKY, TKACHEV, 

AND NECHASV ON THE 

POLITICAL THOUGHT OF V.I. LENIN 

> BY

IAII GRAEI.{E WALLACE, B"A. (Hons) 

A Thesis 

Submitted to the School of Graduate Studies 

in Partial Fulfilnent of the Requirements 

for the Degree 

Master of Arts 

McMaster University 

(c) Copyright by Ian Wallace lAct{ASTER UNIVERSITY LTBRARY I,IASTER OF ARTS (L9921 

(Political Science) Mc}TASTER I'NIVERSITY 

Hamilton, Ontario 

TITLE: The fnfluences of Chernyshevsky, Tkachev, and 

Nechaev on the political thought of V.f. Lenin. 

AIIIHOR: Ian Graene Wallace, B.A. (Hons) (McMaster 

University) 

SIJPERVISOR: Professor Marshall Goldstein.  

> NIJI{BER

OF PAGES: v, L82 

lt ABsTRACT  

> The

collapse of the Soviet Union has challenged 

Marxist political theory. Many people saw the collapse of 

the Soviet Union as a defeat of Marxisn. Most scholars of 

Poritical Theory rearize that Lenin did not folrow Marxist 

writings. However, most still consider Lenin as 

predominately a Marxist. This thesis witl examine the 

source of Lenin,s ideas on Class, the Party, and the 

Revolution, and will trace these differences with Marx to 

chernyshevsky, Tkachev, and Nechaev. rt will irrustrate the 

extent of the influence of Lenints Russian, non-Marxist, 

> predecessors.

Lenin did indeed study and adopt aspects of Marxisn, 

but he d.iffered with hin in some important areas, 

particularly Class, the Party, and the Revolution. Marx, 

writing in western Europe, sought human emancipation, whire 

Lenin, in backlrard, autocratic Russia, sought political 

emancipation from the Tsarist autocracy. This resurted in differences between the thought and writings of Lenin and 

> Marx.
> Ll_]. ACKNOWLEDGEI,TENTg

This thesis could not have been completed without 

the support and encouragement of many people. My 

supervisor, Dr. Marsharl Goldstein, offered his assistance 

and knowledge whenever it was needed. He also gave me 

direction in researching the enormous amount of riterature of Marx and Lenin. His comments have been invaluable. 

r wourd arso rike to thank my supervisory cornmittee 

for their time and patience in directing my research. Dr. 

Peter Potichnyj provided connents and critisrns during my 

proposar stage and once r had compreted rny Thesis offered valuabre suggestions on content and style. r wourd like to 

thank Dr. R.H. Johnston of the llistory Department for taking 

the tine to assist me in this endeavor. He arrowed ne to 

have an historiants perspective on some of the issues that 

were raised. r am also gratefur for Dr. wayne Thorpe and 

Dr. Thomas Prlmak for introducing ne to the world of the 

nineteenth-century Russian revolutionary and to Dr. John 

weaver for loaning me some valuabre research material. r am also indebted to my parents for their moral and 

financial support, without which this Thesis would not have  

> been

possible. Lastly, f would like to thank my good 

friends Chris and paul for providing me with enough 

distractions to keep in touch with the outside worId.  

> McMaster

University 

June L992 Lv 

fan G. Wallace TABLE OF CONTE!flT8 

Abstract aLl 

Acknowledgements.. ...iv 

Chapter One-Introduction... ....2 

Chapter Two-Lenin vs. Marx .....L2 

Class and Class Consciousness 

The RoIe of the Party 

The Revolution 

Chapter Three-Lenin's Marxisn... ..... ....42 

A Background of Lenin's Marxist, and 

Revolutionary Heritage Chapter Four-Chernyshevsky and Lenin. ....7L 

Chernyshevsky and the Russian Revolutionary 

> Movement

Chernyshevsky and Lenin on Class Chernyshevsky and Lenin on the Party 

Chernyshevsky and Lenin on the Revolution Chapter Five-Tkachev and Lenin... .. "9G 

Tkachev and Lenin on Class Tkachev and Lenin on the Party 

Tkachev and tenin on the Revolution Chapter Six-Nechaev and Lenin..... ..L23 

The early Life of Nechaev  

> Nechaev

and Bakunin, Return From Exile, 

and Murder 

Nechaev's Writings- The Epitome of a

Revolutionary and Lenin. 

Conclusions........... ............... ....LSz 

Appendix I-A Proqram of Revolutionarv Action ..163 Appendix II- The Revolutionarv Catechism .L67 

Appendix III- Appendix of Names .....L72 Bibliography. ...L76 

> v

To me the fundamental difference between Marx and 

Lenin is visible on almost every page they wrote. 

It is not a contradiction, but a difference of 

mental attitude. And it is not a complete 

difference, because Marx had in hirn the practical scientist, and Lenin never consciously got rid of 

the metaphysician . Marx states that such a

thing will happen in such a way. Lenin states that 

such is the only way to make it happen. (Max  

> Bastman

as quoted in Page, Lenin, 35. )CHAPTER ONE: INTRoDUCTIoN 

Vladimir rlyich ulyanov, better known as Lenin, red 

the Bolsheviks to victory in the Russian revolution of Lgr7.  

> The

Bolsheviks, who later changed their name to the  

> communist

party of the soviet union (cpsu), ruled the soviet union since L9L7 and onry recently has their powerfur grasp 

on the people of the fifteen union Republics been removed. 

The soviet union has ceased to exist. Many people may argue 

that it is the defeat of rMarxism, or ,communismr. However, 

what was in place in the soviet union cannot be calIed 

Marxism, or at reast orthodox Marxism. rt should be 

referred to as the colrapse of Leninism, or as it is often 

called Marxist-Leninisrn. 

Lenin created the illusion that he was a follower of 

orthodox Marxism and vehernently attacked any attempts to revise Marxism, such as Bernsteinrs Evolutionarv sociarisrn. 

The truth is, however, that Lenin himself revised Marxist 

thought and adapted it to fit the conditions which existed 

in Russia during his tirne. Marx berieved that the 

proletariat was the class which would bring about the 

socialist revorution. He irlustrated in some of his works 

that capitalism had inherent contradictions. capitalism 

itself would create its own enemies in the forrn of the 3

proletariat, who would develop consciousness on their ohrn.  

> Thus

the revolution would be made by a class conscious of 

their historical mission. Lenin, on the other hand, 

substituted the party for the class. Lenin did not believe 

that the proletariat would develop anything more than trade-union consciousness without the help of an outside source. 

For Lenin, that outside source would be a party of 

professional revolutionaries; a vanguard of the proletariat to spur on the consciousness of the workers and to make the 

revolution happen. The differences between Marx and Lenin 

will be discussed in chapter two. Marx believed that the 

revolution would happen. Lenin chose to make it happen. 

Lenints thought was quite different from Marxrs. 

The alterations which he made to Marxism created what became  

> known

as Bolshevism, or Leninisrn. Many scholars note that 

Lenin was not an orthodox Marxist, but few explain the roots 

of his alterations. Lenin was no doubt a rrMarxistrr but he  

> was

just as strongly a Russian thinker. Lenin can be placed 

at the end of a long list of nineteenth century Russian 

thinkers. He attempted to rrmordrr Marxism to his moment of 

history. Lenin was concerned first and foremost with the emancipation of Russian society from Tsarist autocracy. His 

intellectual heritage is one of great interest and wirr be  

> examined

in chapter two. This will enable one to see how 

Lenin developed his rtMarxismrr from a Russian revolutionary 

tradition and how he merged the two to form Borshevism. He 4

forrowed a rich tradition of Russian revorutionary writers including, N.G. Chernyshevsky, P.N. Tkachev, and S.G. 

Nechaev. Indeed, the key elements of Leninisrn, as taken 

from his writings and the actions of the Bolshevik (and 

communist) Party until Lenints death, can be traced backward 

to these very three writers.  

> Perhaps

one of the most important books that Lenin 

read was What is to Be Done? by N.G. Chernyshevsky. Unlike  

> some

accounts by soviet historians, Lenin was not arways a

Marxist. rn fact, he first turned to revorutionary writings 

onry after his brother Alexander was executed for plotting to assassinate the Tsar. The revorutionary idears which he 

first came in contact with were not Marxist but popurist. 

Lenin read chernyshevsky before he read Marx and rearned the 

dialectic from him, rather than frorn Marx or Hegel. 

chernyshevsky was one of the most important revolutionary 

writers of the 1850ts and 1870ts. Sorne of his ideas 

included finding specific sorutions to specific problems, 

and stating that the liberars could not be trusted and thus 

revolution rnust come from berow. Lenin had a high regard 

for Chernyshevsky, even after he had become a tMarxistr, and 

defended what is to be Done? against criticisms. He stated, 

r declare that it is inadmissibre to calr what is to   

> Be Done?

prinitive and untalented. Under its influence hundreds of peopre became revorutionaries. 

It also captivated me. It ploughed me over 

again completely. It is a work which gives 5

one a charge for a whole life. Untalented works 

cannot have such influence.l  

> Chernyshevsky

had faith in the ability of the rnew menrr ds 

he calls them in his major work, to build a nehr society. 

chernyshevsky was one of the first radical writers which 

Lenin read. The onry other writer to have such an effect on 

Lenin was Marx. chapter four will cover the simirarities  

> between

Lenin's ideas and actions and Chernyshevskyrs 

writings.  

> Chernyshevsky

affected a great deal of the 

interrigentsia of the rate 1800ts, including two others who 

affected Lenin greatly, P.N. Tkachev and S. Nechaev.  

> Tkachev

was important for Lenin as he built upon the ideas 

which were put forward by chernyshevsky. Tkachev was the 

first to advance the view that a smarr revolutionary 

minority should, and must, seize state power and use it to bring about the socialist revolution. His sociarist society 

was based on populist ideals not Marxist. He believed in the possibirity of bypassing capitalisn. He believed that in this way Russia courd ttskip a stager, that of capitalisrn. 

Lenin also held Tkachev's writings in very high esteem as 

Bonch-Bruyevich, the librarian for most of the exires, said, Not only did V.f. hinself read these works of 

Tkachev, he also reconmended that all of us 

faniliarize ourselves with the varuabre writings of 

this original thinker. More than once, he asfea  

> 1

as quoted in RoIf Theen, Lenin: Genesis and  

> Development

of a Revolutionary. (New york: Lippincotl,  

> L9731

, 59. 6

nehrly-arrived comrades if they wished to study the 

illegal literature. rrBeginrr V.f . would advisl, rrby 

reading and familiarizing yourself with Tkachevrs 

Nabat. . This is loasic and wiII give you    

> trernendous knowl€dgs. 12
> Tkachev

built on some of the ideas put forward by 

chernyshevsky as well as putting forth his own. The fifth 

chapter of the thesis wirr deal with Tkachev's influence on 

Lenin. 

sergei Nechaev contributed a very inportant fragment 

to Lenints thought. He outlined the necessity for a

professional revorutionary party. Nechaev calred for a

revorutionary who must be completely dedicated to the task, 

to the point of willing to die for it. The revorutionary 

group must be elite and must obey an iron discipline. Much 

of the organization of the Bolshevik party can be traced to 

Nechaev's ideas. Lenin read Nechaev and took his 

Revorutionary catechism and remourded it in Marxist terms 

into the organization of the Bolshevik party. Lenin admired Nechaev because he had no emotion in the destruction of a

society, as Lenin did not in the destruction of rmperial 

Russia.3 The effect which Nechaev had on Leninrs ideas and 

actions will be discussed in chapter six. 

as quoted in Arbert L. weeks, The First Borshevik: 

A Political Biographlz of peter Tkachev. lNew Vorf : llew york 

University press, 1969), 5.  

> 3

Robert payne, The Life and   

> York: Simon

and Schuster , L964) , 29. Death of Lenin. (New 7

The concern of this thesis is to illustrate how much 

Lenin's so-called rMarxisttt thought can be attributed to his 

Russian heritage, particularly these three writers. These 

three have been chosen due to the importance of their non-

Marxist influences upon Lenin. They form a chain of 

thinkers, tied to each other, of which Lenin is the last in line. The second chapter deals with the differences between 

Marx's writings and Lenin's writings and actions. The third 

chapter deals with how Lenin developed his peculiar mix of ideas and how he learned and rrdevelopedrr his Marxism. The 

next three chapters trace back some of Lenints differences 

with Marx to Chernyshevsky, Tkachev, and Nechaev. Lastly, 

and briefly, the conclusion will summarize the arguments  

> made

throughout this thesis. 

Before proceeding into the heart of the Thesis, a

critical review of Literature must first be presented. There were some limits which I had in writing this Thesis. 

I have a working knowledge of German but I do not speak or 

read Russian. Therefore, I had to rely heavily upon 

translated materials, but I do not see that as much of a

problern. There are many translations of Marx and Lenin, and 

only once did f need to use a German edition to clarify the 

English. For Marx, the prirnary work consulted was the  

> Cornmunist

Manifesto, which explains a great part of his 

views on class, party, and the revolution. As well as this, the German rdeology and the contribution to the criticrue of 8

Heqel's Philosophv of Rioht-fntroduction, are important 

sources. For Lenints ideas on these questions one need 

primarily to look at What is to Be Done? However, some 

other works were arso consurted, such as The Tasks of the Russian sociar-Democrats, one step Forward, Two steps Back 

and Two Tactics of Social Democracy. The State and 

Revorution was not used as a rnajor source as many theorists 

and historians consider it as unrepresentative of Lenin's 

thought. Lenin penned The state and Revorution at a time  

> when

the chances of a successfur revolution appeared break. 

Most of the ideas in it were not followed once the 

Bolsheviks seized power. 

The sources used for chapter three were mostly 

secondary sources. This chapter was included to present a

view of Lenints Marxist infruences. The materiar in this 

chapter courd have come from any number of books but r chose 

to cite rnainry from Haimson, The Russian Marxists, Gleason, Young Russia, and offord, The Russian Revorutionary Movement 

in the 1880's. The sources used for the comparisons in the fourth 

chapter centred on the two versions of what is To Be Done?; 

chernyshevsky's original and Lenin's famous pamphret of  

> 1902-1903

and chernyshevsky's serected Essays. As werr as 

this, many secondary sources have been consulted, of which 

the most varuable ones have been woehrlin's chernyshevsky 

and varentinov's Encounters with Lenin. valentinovrs book 9

provides good first person accounts between Lenin and other 

revorutionaries. These sources shourd provide good 

information to illustrate that Lenin did not only read 

chernyshevsky, but that he incorporated many of his ideas 

into his own thought.  

> The

prinary works used in the fifth chapter have  

> been

Venturi's Roots of Revolution, Weeksr, The First 

Bolshevik, and Hardy's, The critic as a Jacobin. Numerous 

other secondary sources were also consulted to verify certain points. There is very rittle of Tkachevrs writings translated into Engrish, however, these books, ds well as 

others, have numerous tracts of Tkachevrs translated. 

The sources used for the sixth chapter, orr Nechaev 

and Lenin, are similar to the fifth chapter. very few of 

Nechaev's writings exist j-n Russian or in English. Most of 

then were destroyed while he was held captive in the peter 

and Paul Fortress. However, some of his writings that do 

exist are translated in part or in whole in other texts.  

> Two

of then have been reproduced in Appendix r: A proqram of 

Revorutionary Action, and Appendix rr: The Revolutionary 

catechism. other invaruabre sources incrude pomper, sergei 

Nechaev, and Gleason, young Russia. 

A few words must arso be given on transliteration. 

There are different hrays to transliterate a word from 

Russian to English, e.g.) Nechaev or Nechayev, 

chernyshevskii or chernyshevsky. r have used the most 10  

> conmon

English form of the given word or the form used in a

particular citation, e.9. ) Zasulich instead of Zazulich.  

> Once

I have used a given form, I have stayed with that particular spelling of that word or name. 11 

Lenints prescription for party organization was 

virtually identicat with that of Tkachev, and in his 

concept of the rrprofessional revolutionaryrr we can 

recognize many attributes of Chernyshevskyts   

> Rakhrnetov and

the fanatic, totally dedicated rrdoomed  

> manrr

described in Nechaev's sinister Catechism. 

Indeed, during the years ahead, Lenin hirnself, like 

no other man before hirn, was to becorne-in the words 

of Karl Radek-the personification of the will to revolution (Theen, Lenin, 95). 

A proper bourgeois revolution cannot be carried out 

without a Jacobin purge-to say nothing of a

socialist revolution. It requires a dictatorship, 

and the dictatorship of the proletariat requires a

Jacobin mentality in the people who set it up. 

Everything is interconnected here. The dictatorship of the proletariat is an absolutely meaningless 

expression without Jacobin coercion. (Lenin in talking to Valenti-nov in Page, Lenin, 7L.') CHAPTER TWO: IJENfN Ag OPPOSED TO UARX  

> Was

Lenin a Marxist,? This question has come under 

examination numerous times, including before Lenin and the 

Bolsheviks had seized power. There are varying schools of 

interpretation. Some, especially the Comrnunist Party of the 

Soviet Union, still hold that Lenin was an orthodox Marxist.  

> More

prevalent, is the conception that Lenin altered Marx 

and fused it with his own experiences in Russia. What the debates often centre around is whether Lenin's alterations to Marx were minor, so as to adapt it to Russia, oE whether 

they fundamentally altered Marx. RoIf Theen calls Lenin's 

thought a fusion of Western Marxism, Russian revolutionary thought and Lenin's distinct psychology.4 Maxinilien Rubel 

believes that, Lenin's theoretical rrinnovationrr in regard to Marxts 

theory can be considered a reversal of historical 

materialism that is generally identified by the 

whole Marxist school with Marx's rnain contribution to social science.5  

> a

Theen, Lenin, L4.  

> 5

Maximilien Rubel, rrThe Relationship of Bol-shevism 

to Marxismrr in Revolutionarv Russia. (Carnbridge: Harvard 

University Press I L968), 31-9. L2 13 

Despite which side one takes, the theories of Marx  

> and

Lenin, although sharing some things in common, differ 

considerably in important areas. There is little doubt that 

Lenin believed in much of what Uarx wrote. However, he did   

> make fundamental

alterations to Marx's writings, which this thesis will argue is a result of the influence of his  

> Russian

heritage. An examination of three areas of Marx's 

theory and Lenin's writings will illustrate some of the 

differences, and similarities, in their thought. The first 

area to be examined wilt be Class and class consciousness, 

the second wiII be the role and composition of the Party,  

> and

the third will be the nature of the revolution. Itarx and Lenin and C1ass and Class Consciousness  

> The

role of the proletariat and class consciousness 

is fundamental to Marx's theory. Lenin agrees with Marx on 

the importance of the proletariat and the importance of 

class consciousness but disagrees with him on how it will develop. First, Iet us take a look at some of Marx's ideas 

on class and class consciousness. For Marx rrThe history of 

all hitherto existing society is the history of class 

struqqlestt6 He places the role of class as a dominant 

factor in the relations of men. The capitalist era of the 

bourgeoisie, known as capitalism, sees the state controlled  

> 5

Karl Marx, The Manifesto of the Cornmunist Party. 

(Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1977,, 35. L4 

by the bourgeoisie. As Marx writes, rrThe executive of the  

> modern

State is but a committee for managing the common 

affairs of the whole bourgeoisie"T Capitalisrn destroys  

> much

of the old world, much of what was noble and good. It 

reduces the |tfamily relation to a mere money relationrr and 

converted most occupations rrinto its paid wage-Iabourersrt8 

Capitalism is forced to constantly revolutionize production 

so as to survive. Everything that was old is destroyed and 

everything that is new, soon becomes outdated. ItAll that is solid melts into airtt.9 However, the nature of capital then, is such that competition creates moments of 

overproduction. Therefore, Capital suffers periodic crises, 

each one worse than the previous. The conquest of new 

rnarkets and the further exploitation of old ones allows 

capital to evade these crises but in doing so make the next  

> one

worse and ttdininishing the rneans whereby crises are 

preventefl. rrlo 

on top of this, the bourgeoisie and capitalism bring 

their own enemies upon themselves. Capital, due to its nature, requires the existence of a working class, the 

proletariat. As Marx states,  

> 7

rbid., 

8 rbid., 

e rbid.,  

> 10

rbid., 

> 38. 38. 39.
> 4L-42. 15

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons 

that bring death to itself; it has also called into 

existence the men who are to wield thos.e weapons-the modern working class-the proletarians. "

Capitat cannot do anything to prevent the existence and 

growth of the proletariat. Private property is the basis of 

capital and to preserve its existence, its opposite, the 

propertyless proletariat is kept in existence.12 The 

proletariat is the only class which has a hope of 

emancipating mankind because it is a rrclass in civil society which is not a class of civil societyrr. The proletariat 

rrclaims no traditional status but only a human statusrr. The 

proletariat must ernancipate aII of society to emancipate 

itse1f.13 This answers the question of why class is 

important and why the proletariat is an historical class, 

but the question still remains: How witl they develop 

consciousness of their historical mission? The proletariat is a class, 

which has to bear all the burdens of society without 

enjoying its advantages . a class which 

comprises the majority of the members of society and 

in which there develops a consciousness of the need  

> 11

rbid. , 42.  

> 12

KarI Marx, rrAlienation and Social Classesrr in 

Robert C. Tucker, The Marx-Enqels Reader- Second Edition.  

> (New

York: W.W. Norton and CompatrY, L978), 133.  

> 13

Karl Marx, rrContribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right-Introduction.rr in T.B. Bottomore  

> and

Maximilien Rubel, editors, Karl Marx: Selected Writings 

in Sociology and Social Philosophy. (Markham: Penguin Books  

> Canada

Ltd., 1986), L90. 16 

for a fundamental revolution, the communist  

> consciousness. 14

Marx believed that the protetariat would inevitably develop 

class consciousness due to the nature of capital.  

> Consciousness

is directly related to material activity. It is sirnply conscious existence. When the proletariat begin 

to see the situation which they are in, they will realize that they must change it. The material conditions in which 

the proletariat live mold their consciousness. As 

capitalism expands and develops, so to does the 

consciousness of the proletariat. Marxts conception of 

consciousness is that ftlife is not determined by 

consciousness, but consciousness by life.tt15  

> The

nature of capitalisn is such that there is an 

ever increasing tendency for the concentration of capital. This in turn brings more proletariat together, and its strength grows. The increase in the use of machinery makes 

the proletariat's lives even more precarious. This creates 

conflicts. Capital will atternpt to increase the amount of surplus value that the proletariat create either by 

Iengthening the working day, or by intensifying the labour 

process. The proletariat witl resist such changes, bringing 

them into ever-increasing conflict with the owners of the  

> means

of production. The workers will begin to form unions la KarI Marx, rrThe German Ideologyrr in Bottornore and 

Rubel Selected Writings, 79.  

> 15

rbid. , 89-90. L7 

to defend themselves against the owners of the means of 

production. Marx states that the workers are seldorn 

victorious, but that the real success of their battles is the increased organization of the workers. The organization 

of the proletariat turns the workers first into a c1ass, and 

then into a political party. The struggle against the  

> owners

of the means of production is a class struggle but it is also a political strugg1e.16 Capital will atternpt to 

lower its costs by using cheap labour. As the proletariat is deskilled and technology fragments skilled work into unskilled work, labour power becomes easier to replace and 

therefore, cheaper. As capital develops there is a trend 

towards the increasing pauperization of the proletariat.  

> More and more

join the army of surplus labour. To free 

itself from the bonds of capitalism, the proletariat must  

> change

society, and they, therefore, take on a political role. The working-c1ass movement and the working-class 

party become considered as one in the same. Thus, economic 

battles become political battles, as was the case for the 

eight-hour day: 

And in this wdy, out of separate economic movements 

of the workers there grows up everlrwhere a political 

# T":"';il:;nlnt;":: ;:":i:"1=';;:3ff;":: :":";*i;'  

> 16

Marx, The Communist Manifesto, 43-45. 18 

degree of previous organization, they are in turn eqrlally a io".ns of deieloping ttris oiganization.lT 

To summarize, for Marx the proletariat would develop 

a revolutionary class consciousness sinply due to working 

conditions and every day life under capitalism.ls The 

proletariat wiII become conscious of their historical role  

> because

of their material conditions, ie) their poverty.  

> The

nature of capital is such that the proletariat are the 

only truly revolutionary class, dS they are outside of civil society. To ernancipate themselves, they must emancipate aII of society. Capitalism contains the seeds for its own 

downfa1l, the proletariat, and they will use these crises to 

help capitatism collapse and transform society. Marx had 

the following to say about what he did for class:   

> And now

as to rnyself r Do credit is due to me f or 

discovering the existence of classes in modern 

society or the struggle between them. Long before  

> me

bourgeois historians had described the historical  

> development

of this class struggle and bourgeois economists the economic anatomy of the classes.  

> What

I did that was neht was to prove: 1) that the 

existence of classes is only bound up with 

particular historical phases in the development of 

production, 2') that the class struggle necessarily Ieads to the dictatorship of the proletariat, 3) 

that this dictatorship itself only constitutes the  

> 17

Karl Marx, rrletter to Bolterr, as quoted in John 

A. Debrizzi, rrMarx and Lenin: C1ass, Party and Democracyrl 

Studies in Soviet Thouqht . (24 (2) , August L982') , 99 . 

> 18

Debrizzi, Marx and Lenin, 1oo. Sorne theorists 

argue that Marxts conceptions were only applicable for 

Laissez faire capitalism. L9 

transition to the abolition of all classes and to a

classless society.le 

Lenin, like Marx, believed that the proletariat was 

a revolutionary class. Lenin sees the Russian proletariat 

as an example from which the world can learn. He sees them 

as rrthe vanguard of the international revolutionary 

proletariat.rr20 For Lenin, only the proletariat, because 

of its unique class position (as Marx outlined), could be 

the rrvanguard fighter for political liberty and for 

democratic institutions.,t2l Lenin saw the proletariat's role as helping to bring about political emancipation, which 

he saw as necessary in Tsarist Russia. He was not as 

concerned with rrhumanrr emancipation or the ilemancipation of 

all otherstt, which is what Marx was prirnarily concerned with 

and saw as the role of the proletariat. Lenin followed 

Marx's writings quite closely in dealing with the role of 

the proletariat as the only revolutionary class. However, 

Lenin stressed the Russian proletariat over other 

proletariat. This will be discussed in later chapters 

concerning Lenin and Chernyshevsky, Tkachev, and Nechaev. 

Lenin was dealing in his particular moment of history. He  

> 19

KarI Marx, rrl,etter to Joseph Weyderneyer, March 

5th, 1852rr as quoted in Tucker, The Marx-Engels Reader, 22O.  

> 20

V.I.Lenin, What is to Be Done? in Robert C. 

Tucker, editor, The Lenin Anthology. (New York: W.W. Norton 

and Compdnyr L975), 22.  

> 21

v.I. Lenin, The Tasks of the Russian Social  

> Democratsrr

in Tucker, The Lenin Anthology, 9-l-0. 20 

arso stretched the meaning of Marxrs writings by referring to a segTment of the peasantry, those who were exproited by 

other peasants, as the rrrural proletariattt.22 Lenin, 

attenpting to appry Marxism to underdeveroped Russia, had to   

> some how

deal with the rnajority of the population which was 

not proletariat, but peasants. Thus, he coined the term 

rrrurar proletariatrr to get around this problem. Lenin did 

concur with Marx on the point of capital tending to 

concentrate itself, which in turn also concentrates the 

workers. Lenin says the following about capitalism creating 

a mass of proletariat: In its struggle for power the proletariat has no 

other weapon but organisation [sic]. Disunited by 

the rule of anarchic conpetition in the bourgeois 

world, ground down by forced labour for capital, constantly thrust back to the rlower depthsr of 

utter destitution, savagery and degenerltion, the 

proletariat can, and inevitably will, become an 

invincible force only through its ideological 

unification on the principles of Marxisrn being 

reinforced by the materiar unity of organisatlon, 

which welds miII_ions of toilers into an army of the 

working class. rt23  

> where

Lenin goes off on a tangent from Marx is his stress on 

the organization of the working crass. Lenin berieved that the working crass would only deverop the beginnings of  

> consciousness

on their own and needed herp from outside. 

Lenin arso pointed out that the workers in Russia were  

> 22

rbid. , 5.  

> 23

V.I. I,enin, One Step Forward, Two Steps Back. in 

Tucker, The Lenin Anthology, 119. 2t organized in very large enterprises and thus easier to 

organize. 

Lenin believed that the struggle with the owners of 

the means of production would teach the workers that the  

> owners

are antagonistic to the goals and demands of the 

working class. This would help to teach the workers that 

they would have to fight for any real improvement in their position. This is the acquisition of a very basic level of 

consciousness, but no more.24 Lenin, in an article entitled, t'on Strikes'r states,  

> What

a great moral influence strikes have, how they 

affect workers who see that their comrades have  

> ceased

to be slaves. . Every strike brings thoughts of socialism very forcibly to the worker's 

mind, thoughts of the struggle of the entire working 

class for emancipation from the oppression of 

capital it is strikes that have gradually 

taught the working-class of all countries to struggle against the governments for workers' rights 

and ior the rights of the people as a who1e.zs 

In this passage, Lenin recognizes that strikes work toward 

the consciousness of the proletariat, However, he does not 

believe that the proletariat can alone develop consciousness 

of their historical mission. He does not believe that the workers can themselves bring down capitalism in one of its crises. Lenin wrote in What is to Be Done? that the workers 

in Russia could not develop any real class consciousness. 

Lenin on  

> Thought.
> 2a

John Ehrenberg, rrCommunists and Proletarians:  

> Consciousness

and Spontaneitytt in Studies in Soviet 

(25(4), May 1983), 289.  

> 25

V.I. Lenin, tton Strikesrr, ds quoted in DebrizzL, 

Marx and Lenin, 104-105. 22  

> They

were conscious of the antagonisms of their ernployers 

but not of society. He believed that the workers could not  

> escape

concerning themselves solely with economic matters. 

Perhaps one of Lenin's most famous phrases is the following:  

> The

history of aII countries shows that the working 

class, exclusively by its own effort, iF, able to 

develop only trade union consciousness.zo 

Lenin continues in the same work by stating, 

Working-class consciousness cannot be genuine 

political consciousness unless the workers are 

trained to respond to aII cases of tyranny, 

oppression, violence, and abuse, Do rnatter what 

class is affected-unless they are trained, moreover, 

to respond from a Social-Democratic point of view and no other."' 

Lenin believed, ds Marx did, that the working class, 

the proletariat, was the class which would lead the 

socialist revolution. It could attain its, and therefore 

mankind's, emancipation only through revolutionary means.  

> However,

Marx believed that capitalism would cause the 

proletariat to develop political consciousness, while Lenin 

believed that they needed an outside source to help thern: 

Class political consciousness can be brought to the workers only from without, that is, only from 

outside the economic struggle, fron outside the sphere of relations between workers and 

> ernployers.28

For Lenin this outside source was the Communist Party. 

> 26

Anthologv, 

> 27 28

Lenin, 

> 24.

rbid., rbid.,  

> What

is to Be Done, in Tucker, The Lenin 

> 42.
> 50. 23

l{arx and lJenin and the RoIe of tbe Party  

> Some

of the greatest differences between Marx and 

Lenin deal with the role and composition of the party. Marx  

> saw

the party as part of the class (the proletariat). Lenin, however, did not agree. He believed that the party 

must be composed of professional revolutionaries and must 

bring political consciousness and organization to the 

working-class movernent. This is most evident in Nechaev and 

will be further elaborated on in Chapter Six. 

For Marx, the Communists were sirnply the most   

> advanced segTments

of the working-class. The conrnunists have 

the advantage of knowing that history will proceed in their 

favour.Ze Armed with Marxrs theory, they know that 

capitarism will colrapse due to its internar contradictions. 

For Marx, rrthe Communists do not form a separate party  

> opposed

to other working-class partiesrr.30 The rrpartyn for 

Marx is virtually the same as rrthe classrr. The Communists 

are simpry the most advanced of the proletariat and thus are 

rrthe theorists of the proletariatrr .31 Marx was against any 

idea of others leading the working crass to revorution. The 

workers, for Marx, will develop consciousness of their historical destiny on their own accord. Marx stated that,  

> 29

ltlarx, Communist Manifesto , 49.  

> 30

rbid. , 49 . 

> 31

Marx, rrThe Poverty of philosophyr as quoted in 

Bottomore and Rubel, Selected Writings, 80. 24  

> We

cannot ally ourselves, therefore, with people who 

openry decrare that the workers are too uneducated 

to free themselves and must first be riberated from above by philanthropic big bourgeois and petty  

> bourgeois.

" 

> Marx was

also against anyone who founded a sociarist trsectn. He recognized that sects, and thus their readers, hrere 

inescapable, but he did not believe that they shourd read 

the working class. He stated that leaders of sects, 

are an unavoidable evil: with time they are shaken 

off. All the socialist founders of sects 

belong to a period in which the working class 

thernselves were neither sufficiently trained and 

organised by the march of capitalisl society itself to enter as historical agents upon the worldrs 

stage, nor were the material conditions of their 

emancipation sufficiently matured.33 

Lenin could fit the description of an undesirable for Marx 

in the above two quotes as he advocated both professional 

revorutionaries and he himserf could be considered a reader 

of a sect. This wilr be covered more crosely after an 

examination of Marxts views on the role of the rpartyr.  

> 32

Karl Marx, ,Circular Letter to Bebe1, Liebknecht, 

Bracker et a1.rr in The First rnternational and After. edited 

by David Fernbach, (Middlesex: eengu@g71),  

> 375.
> 53

Karl Marx, rrThe Civil War in Francer as quoted in Debrizzi, rrMarx and Leninr, IO2. 25 

As stated earlier, Marx considered the party34 as 

simply part of the class. The party was not synonymous with 

the class but was a part of it. For Marx, the party is part 

of the proletariat not an outside force. The Communists,  

> rrdo

not set up any sectarian principles of their own by 

which to shape and mold the proletarian movement. rt35 Their 

aims are not any different than those of the proletariat 

themselves and other proletarian parties. That is, their  

> irnrnediate

airns are, rrthe formation of the proletariat into a

class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of 

political power by the proletariat.1156 The Communists have 

the advantage of rrclearly understanding the line of rnarch, 

the conditions and the ultimate general results of the 

proletarian movement.tt3T The rrpartyrr, in other words, 

sirnpty helps the proletariat in its historical rnission. The 

proletariat will naturally and inevitably overthrow 

capitalism. The rrpartyrr helps the proletariat become 

spontaneous. As Marx wrote, 

34 Marx was sornewhat unclear of what he meant by 

rrpartyrr. By examining the German text it appears that he  

> seems

to have favoured the notion of movement over party,  

> Bewegung

over partei. This illustrates that the proletariat 

were themselves the rrmovementrr and were not to be led by a

party in the traditional meaning of the word. See KarI 

Marx, Manifest Der Kommunistischen Partei. (Munich: WiIheIn 

Fink Verlag, L969) , 61-63.  

> 35

Marx, Comrnunist Manifesto , 49.  

> 36

rbid. , 49-50.  

> 37

rbid. , 49. 26 

an international bond of the working classes can 

ever ensure their definitive triumph. This want has 

given birth to the International Working Men's 

Association. That Association has not been hatched 

by a sect or a theory. It is the spontaneous growth 

of the proletarian movernent; which itself is the 

offspring of the natural and irrepressible 

tendenci6s of modern society.38 The only role which Marx gives the party in assisting the 

proletariat is to help them develop until they are able to 

fend for themselves. This occurs only when the proletariat is not very advanced in its organization. If the 

proletariat's rrpartyr! (which are thernselves proletariat), do 

not help their brothers, then the proletariat as a whole 

could rrremain a mere plaything in theirIbourgeoisie] 

hands.rrse In other words, Marx believed that the  

> Communists

could help the rest of the proletariat with 

tactics. Lenin held quite different views on the composition of the party and its mernbers and the role of the 

party. 

Marx believed that the prinary force in the 

revolution would be the class; the proletariat. For Marx, 

writing in Gerrnany, political enancipation had been 

attained. What was sought was human ernancipation. However, 

Lenin substituted rrthe partyrr for rrclassrr. Lenin believed 

that what was more irnportant to the revolution was that the  

> 38

KarI Marx, rrReport to the Brussels Congressrr in 

The First, International and After , 99.  

> 39

Marx, rrl,etters to Americansrr, as quoted in Debrizzi, ItMarx and Leninrr, 101. 27 

rrpartyrr or Communists were professional revolutionaries. 

Lenin did not distinguish between political and human 

emancipation. Lenin was primarily concerned with political emancipation. Max Eastman gives a fine explanation of how 

Lenin altered Marx in this respect: 

Lenin founded his Bolshevik organization upon a

recognition of the indispensable historic function 

of a group of people who h/ere not defined according 

to the economic class to which they belonged, but 

were defined according t.o^ their purposive activity 

and their state of mind.au 

Marx saw such a class but for him these were bourgeois 

intellectuals, not leaders of a party to create 

revolutionaries. Lenin's ideas of whom the party should be  

> composed

of is well developed in What is to Be Done?. Lenin 

attacks tactics and policies which he calls amateurish. He 

states that the arnateur organization of the Russian Marxists 

of the late nineteenth century can no longer be foIlowed. 

The secret police network, according to Lenin, was too large 

and effective for the circles and organizations which they 

had. He compares these Marxists' tactics to warfare by   

> rrpeasants armed

with clubs against modern troops. rr41 Lenin 

points out that a primary task of the rrpartyrr is to ttestablish an organisation of revolutionaries capable of   

> 40 Max Eastrnan,

Stanley W. Page, editor, 

Revolutionary Pragrmatist. 32. rrEngineer of Revolutionrr in Lenin: Dedicated Marxist or 

(St Louis: Forum Press, L9771 , 

> 41

Lenin, What is to Be Done, in Tucker, The Lenin 

Anthology, 62. 28 

lending energy, stability, and continuity to the political struggle.ttaz For examples of such revolutionaries Lenin 

cites not Marxists, but o1d populists including Khalturin 

and Zheliabov.a3 These revolutionaries are no longer to be 

amateurs, but professional revolutionaries, dedicated to  

> making

the socialist revolution. Where for Marx the old 

society will destroy itself and the proletariat will create  

> and

build the new one, for Lenin the prine task of the 

revolution is not building a new society but destroying the 

old one. This can be seen by the type of revolutionary that 

Lenin wants. As Lenin puts it, the struggle against the political police requires 

special qualities; it requires professional 

revolutionaries. . the organisation of the 

revolutionaries must consist first and foremost of 

people who make revolutionary activity their profession . all distinctions as between workers 

and intellectuals, not to speak of distinctions of 

trade and profession, in both categories, must be     

> ef faced. aa -

Lenin, as can be seen from the above quote, is  

> concerned

with the overthrow of the Tsarist autocracy. He 

is aining for the poritical emancipation of Russian society.  

> What

is irnportant, as Eastman pointed out, is that Lenin no 

longer agrees with Marx on who the Cornmunists are. For 

Lenin, the communists must be professional revorutionaries.  

> 42

rbid. , 63.  

> 43

Ibid., 64. see Appendix rII for further information on Khalturin and Zheliabov.  

> 44

rbid., 66-68. 29  

> They

do not have to be workers. Marx believed that the 

proletariat themselves would make the revolution while Lenin 

has the Vanguard leading the proletariat (and peasantry) to revolution. Lenin rnakes five assertions about the composition of the communists and it is worth quoting in full: r mean professionar revolutionaries, irrespective of 

whether they have developed frorn among students or working men. r assert: (1) that no revorutionary  

> movement

can endure without a stable organisation of 

leaders rnaintaining continuity; (2) thai the broader 

the popular mass drawn spontaneously into the 

struggle, which forms the basis of the movement and 

participates in it , the more urgent the need for 

such an organisation, and the more solid this 

organisation must be . i (3) that such an 

organisation must consist chiefly of people 

professionarly engaged in revolulionary lctivity; (4) that in an autocratic state, the more we coiiine the rnembership of such an organisation to the people  

> who

are professionally trained in the art of  

> combating

the poritical police, the more difficurt wirl it be to unearth the organisation; and (5) the 

greater will be the number of people fron the 

working crass and from the other locial crasses who 

witl be abre_ to join the movement and perform active 

work in it.45 

Lenin, then, not only wants professional revorutionaries, 

but wants a strong organisation. The fifth point states 

that it will be possible for rnore revolutionaries to come 

from the working crass. Howeverr ds the previous quote showed, Lenin wanted professional revorutionaries, 

regardress of whether they were workers. The desire for continuity is another way for Lenin to call for a centralist  

> 15

rbid. , 76-77 .30 

party. unlike Marx, Lenin also states that other classes 

can join the movement. 

For Marx, Communists were proletarians, but for 

Lenin Communists were revolutionaries. As Lenin states in  

> Two

Tactics of Socia1 Democracyl I'the only force capable of 

gaining a rrdecisive victory over tsarismil is the people, 

i.e., the proletariat and the peasaDtry.r45 Again, one can 

see that Lenints prime enemy is the Tsarist autocracy, not 

the bourgeoisie. He is striving for the political 

emancipation of the conmon Russian people, workers and 

peasants. Lenints differences with Marx carry over to his 

conception of the role of the party (as has been briefly 

eluded to. )

Lenin believed that the proletariat on their own 

could achieve nothing more than trade-union consciousness. 

Therefore, he gave the party the role of the Vanguard Party 

of the proletariat. The party was to lead the proletariat  

> rrfrom

withouttt. The party was to be a smaIl, centralized 

party cornposed of professional revolutionaries. For Lenin, 

rwithout a revolutionary party there can be no revolutionary   

> movemenat.4T However,

he did not necessarily consider this 

against Marxism. As Lenin wrote:  

> a6

Lenin, Two Tactics of Social Democracv, in 

Tucker, The Lenin Antholoqy, 130.  

> 47

Lenin, ds quoted in Jeff Organization: The Question of the 

Politics and Societv. (7(1)' L977), 

Lustig, ttOD 

Leninist Partyrr, in  

> 27. 31
> We

do not regard Marx's theory as sornething  

> completed and

inviolable; on the contrary, we are 

convinced that it has only laid the foundation stone 

of the sciences which socialists must develop we think that an independent elaboration of Marxts 

theory is especially essential for Russian 

socialists; for this theory provides only general 

guiding principles.48 

Lenin's rnajor alteration to Marx in this area cannot be 

treated lightly as Lenin's above quote would have it. Lenin 

substituted the party, composed of professional 

revolutionaries, for the class, the proletariat, as the 

decisive factor in a socialist revolution. 

Lenin distrusted the masses' spontaneity. He 

outlined a major task of the party as the combatting of 

spontaneity. ff the workers are left to their own, they 

will follow trade-union ideology, which can be equated with 

bourgeois ideology as it deals with economic, not political 

matters.4e The workers will be distracted by their  

> immediate needs

for rnaterial improvement and self-defense. Lenin believed that, rrthe spontaneous struggle of the 

proletariat will not become its genuine rrclass strugglerl 

until this struggle is led by a strong organisation of revolutionaries. tt50 Some of the other tasks of the party 

that Lenin outlined included not dismissing terror as a

48 Lenin, from Collected Works, ds quoted in Debrizzi, rrMarx and Leninrr, 108.  

> a9

Lenin, trWhat is to Be Donerr, in Tucker, The Lenin 

Anthologv, 28-29.  

> 50

rbid., 95. 32  

> weapon,

and the spreading of propaganda and agitation 

through placing rrour own people everywhere"-51 

A major concern for Lenin was party organization. 

For Lenin, the party must not be too extensive and it must 

be as secret as possible. This goes hand in hand with the composition of the party being professional revolutionaries. 

As well as these, the partyr ds previously mentioned, must 

be centralj-zed to its leadership.tt   

> Rosa Luxemburg,

the German socialist, entered into  

> some

debates with Lenin about his theories dealing with the 

role of the party. She rejected Lenin's notion of centralism as a bastardization of Marx, and criticized the 

anti-democratic policies of the Bolshevik Party.53 she had 

the following to say about Lenints ideas of centralism: 

the two principles on which Lenints centralism rests are precisely these: 1) The blind subordination in the smallest detail, of all party organs, to the 

party center, which alone thinks, guides, and 

decides for all. 2) The rigorous separation of the organized nucleus of revolutionaries from its social-revolutionary surrounding. . The 

ultracentralism asked by Lenin is fuII of the 

sterile spirit of the overseer. It is no a positive 

and creative spirit. . Let us speak plain1y. 

Historically, the errors committed by a truly revolutionary movement are infinitely more fruitful 

than the ififallibility of the cleverest Central 

> committee.5a
> 51
> 5Z
> 53
> 54

in Bender, 

rbid., 48-55. 

rbid., 76-77. 

Bender, The Betrayal of Marx, 279.   

> Rosa Luxemburg,

Leninism and Marxism, dS  

> The

Betraval of Marx, 2OO-2O4.  

> quoted 33
> Luxemburg,

a long tirne critic of revisionism, was one of the 

few socialists who were not tarnished by supporting the 

First World War. She also criticized Lenin's conception of 

the theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat. she 

claimed that the dictatorship that the Bolsheviks created 

was, rronly the dictatorship of a handful of politicians; that is, dictatorship in the bourgeois sense, in the sense 

of the rules of the Jacobins. r'55 

Thus, Lenin did not agree with Marx on the nature 

and the role of the party. Marx did not call for professional revolutionaries, advocate terror, or invent the 

one-party state. These, for Lenin, were all derived from 

his Russian revolutionary past. As Peter Wiles states, 

rrl,enin was quintessentially Russianrr.56    

> ITARX Al{D LENIN Al[D THE REVOLUTION

Lenin, ds shown above, nade some fundamental 

alterations to Marx with respect to the rise of 

consciousness in the proletariat, the role of the party, and 

the composition of the party. These changes play a central 

role in the differences between Marx and Lenin with respect 

to the timing of the revolution and the nature of the     

> 55 Rosa Luxemburg, rrThe

Russian RevolutioDtt, as 

quoted in Rubel, rrThe Relationship of Bolshevism to 

Marxismrr, 319.  

> 55

Peter Wi1es, rrl,eninisrn and Weltinnenpolitikrr in 

Survev. (22(3-4) , Surnmer-Autumn L976) , 160. 34 

revolution. Marx believed the revolution would come about because of capitalism's collapse, but Lenin's interpretation  

> was

that the revolution would cause the bourgeoisie's defeat 

and the proletariat could use the state for a transition to socialism. In other words, for Marx there was a need to 

pass through the stage of capitalism, while Lenin believed 

that the party could control and harness capital. Marx, 

thus, predicted that the revolution would occur in an 

industrially advanced country such as England or Gerrnany, 

not in backward Russia. 

According to N. Berdyaev5T, a contemporary of 

Leninrs, Russia at the tirne of the revolution was not suited 

at all for a revolutionary theory such as Marxism. Russia was primarily an agricultural country. The majority of the 

population hrere peasants, not proletariat. In fact, proportionately there hrere an insignificant number of 

proletariat. As well as this Russia had an out-of-date 

commercial life. However, Marxism was used in Russia, with 

its adaptations, by Leninr58. 

For Marx, capitalism was a stage which was necessary 

in the progression of history. Marx was a determinist who   

> 57 Berdyaev

is not the only one who has pointed out 

that Russia was not ready for Marxism. However, Berdyaev  

> was

a contemporary of Lenints and later as an exile was an 

opponent of the State which the Bolsheviks created.  

> 58

llikolai aerdyaev, The Russian Idea. (Boston:   

> Beacon Press

, L962) , 249. The main emphasis of this book is the predominance of Russian messianism in Russian writings 

and in the ideas of its leaders. 35 

believed that capitalism, the rule by the bourgeoisie, 

followed feudalism and in turn would be followed by 

soeialism. The progression may not be so simple but it 

would happen nonetheless. Capitalisn, as previously 

mentioned, is forced to concentrate, and thus forced to 

concentrate its workers, the proletariat. The proletariat 

develop political consciousness through everyday economic 

life. Capitalism, due to its own internal contradictions, 

suffers periodic crises. The struggle of the proletariat 

versus the bourgeoisie begins as a national struggle. This 

struggle is,  

> more

or less veiled civil war, raging within existing society, up to the point where that war 

breaks out into open revolution, and where the 

violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the 

foundation for the sway of the proletariat.  

> The development

of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the 

bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products.  

> What

the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above 

all, is its own gravediggers. Its faII and the 

victory of the proletariat are equally 

inevitable. )Y 

Thus, the revolution is something which is inevitable. The 

revolution will come about during a crisis of capitalism.  

> What

is important to note is that for Marx, the proletariat are created by the bourgeoisie in capital. Capital, 

controlled by the bourgeoisie, is a necessary stage. 

During the actual revolution, the proletariat are to 

be the main force. They wiII be the ones who control the  

> 59

Marx, The Communist Manifesto, 48. 36 

revolution. To emancipate themselves, they must emancipate 

all other classes from capitalisrn. Recalling what Marxts 

conception of the party was; the conmunists are sirnply the most advanced sections of the proletariat. As Marx wrote: To convert social production into one large and 

harmonious system of free and cooperative labour, 

general social changes are wanted, changes of the 

general conditions of society, never to be realized 

save by the transfer of the organized forces of 

society, viz., the state power, from capitatists and 

landlords to the producers themselves.ou 

In a revolution the proletariat, not a rrVanguardrr are the  

> ones who

should have the power. Substituting a party for the landlords does not free labour. The political element 

of a revolution is only needed for the rroverthrow and 

dissolutionrr. As soon as the organizing begins, and 

socialisrlts, rrown purpose and spirit come to the fore, socialism sheds this political covering.116l Lenin's conception of the revolution is quite different from this.   

> Wheras Marx was concerned

with a social revolution, Lenin 

sought to lead a socialist revolution.  

> Marx

wrote that "philosophy is the head of this 

emancipation and the proletariat is its hearttt62 once 

consciousness in the proletariat is attained, the revolution  

> 60

Marx, rrlnstructions for delegates to the Geneva 

Congressrr. in The First fnternational and After, 90.  

> 51

Marx as quoted in Bottomore and Rubel, Selected 

Writinqs, 243.  

> 62

Marx, rrContribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right: fntroductionrr, ds quoted in Marx-Engels 

Reader, 65. 37 

can come about. As the proletariatr dS a class, realized 

the injustices of society, they will have the knowledge to  

> change

it through revolution. Lenin twisted Marxts meaning 

of this and himself wrote that revolutionary consciousness 

must be brought to the workers from ttwithoutrr, by a Vanguard 

Party.63 Lenin did not accept the two-stage theory of 

revolution, i.e., that a bourgeois revolution had to precede 

a social revolution. He believed that Russia was almost 

ready in L9L7 for the type of revolution that Marx outlined 

in the Communist Manifesto. He believed that Russia could rrskiprr capitalism by seizing the state and using it.r'4 As 

previously rnentioned this was not possible as Russia did not 

fit the conditions for a Marxian social revolution.  

> Berdyaev

recalls that Lenin insisted that the revolution 

would have a distinctly Russian character. He wrote, ttH€ 

[Lenin] always said that the Russian revolution would not be 

as the doctrinaires of Marxism pictured it.t'65 

During the revolution Lenin and the Bolsheviks did  

> many

things which betrayed the principles of Marxism. For 

example, because of the backwardness of Russia, Lenin used 

the peasantry as a revolutionary force, coining the term, 

rrrural-proletariatrr. Lenin called for the seizing of power  

> 53

Theen, Lenin, 81. 

e Theen, Lenin, 85.  

> 65

Nikolai eerdyaev, The oriqin of Russian   

> Communism. (Ann

Arbour: University of Michigan Press, 1960), 

> 116. 38

first, and determining what to do later. He is credited 

with the following statements: 

Seizure of power is the point of the uprising. Its political task will be clarified after the seizure.  

> such

a guarantee [of the Bolsheviks having a

rnajorityl history has never proffered, and is absolutely in no position to proffer in any 

revolution.  

> To

wait for the constituent assenbly, lv,hich will 

obviously not be for us, is senseless.* 

It is obvious from these quotes that Lenin did not emphasize 

in his writings that the proletariat was not the rnajority in 

Russia at that point in tirne. For Marx this was not the 

tirne for revolution, but Lenin, with his Jacobin 

professional revolutionaries, decided to make it the time 

for revolution. He wanted to seize the state and use it for his conception of rrthe dictatorship of the proletariatrr. This concept will be developed more in Chapter Five, on the 

similarities between Tkachev and Lenin. Un1ike Marx, Lenin wanted to use state power, not destroy it imnediately. He 

wrote that, the proletariat needs state power, the centralized organization of force [and] violence, in order 

to suppress the resistance of the exploiters and to 

Iead the great mass of the population-the peasants, 

the petty bourgeoisie, and the semi-proletarians-in 

the LstaUtisnment of a socialist economy.5T 

6 aII three quotes by Lenin, rrToward the Seizure of  

> Powerrr,

in Michael Karpovich, rrA Forerunner of Lenin: P.N.  

> Tkachevrr,

in The Review of Politics. (5(3), JuIy L944, , 348.  

> 67

Lenin as quoted in Theen, !.si;1, 1L6. 39 

Indeed, the revolution saw the workers, the 

proletariat who were supposed to be in control, lose that control to their rrvanguardrr. The soviets became battle-

grounds for party conflicts. The decisions which were made 

in the soviets were seldom made by the workers, but by the 

party caucuses.6 Later in the revolution, the Bolsheviks  

> began

to nationalize industries. This nationalization saw 

the workers lose control over their workplace, the opposite 

of what was supposed to happen in a social revolution. This 

created hostility from workers' opposition groups and trade-

unions. The proletariat were against the dictatorship of 

the proletariat.6e  

> Maxim

Gorky, the famed Russian writer, became 

appalled by the excesses of the Bolshevik regime and 

believed that the good sense of the working class would 

prevail over Lenin and his Bolsheviks: 

but I believe that the good sense of the working 

class and its awareness of its historical tasks will 

soon open the eyes of the proletariat to the utter inpossibility of realizing Lenin's promises, to all the depth of his madness, and to his Nechaev and 

Bakunin brand of anarchi-sm. tu  

> He

believed, as Marx wrote in quote which was cited earlier, that the working class will throw off its leaders of 

s Jim wohlforth, rrTransition to the Transitionrr, in 

73. New Left Review. No 130,  

> 6e

rbid. , 77.   

> 70 l,Iaxim

Gorky in Novaya Zhizn, No L77 , Nov 7th (2o) ,

L9L7, dS taken from Page, Lenin, 79. 40 

rrsectsrr. Gorky was horrif ied by the way Lenin manipulated 

the working class. He wrote: 

Vladinir Lenin is introducing a

Russia by Nechaev's rnethod-full socialist order in   

> stearn ahead

through 

the swamp.  

> The

working class is metalworker. Is it conditions to mold a

> ore?.71

for Lenin, what ore is for a

possible under all present 

socialist state from this 

Thus, Lenin's idea of revorution and how it shourd progress 

is quite different from Marx's. Lenin's Russian heritage 

prayed a rarge rore in his alterations to Marx as can be 

evidenced in the quotes by Gorky. At times Lenin forrowed 

Marx's writings that capitalist society would lead 

inevitabry towards the social revorution whire at the same 

tine he often asserted that the proletarian revolution would 

have to be lead by intellectuals, the vanguard, if it was to 

ever take place.72 He would not wait for the social 

revorution, but would make a soci-a1ist revolution. John 

Ehrenberg sums it up welr by saying that, "rf the Marxist in 

Lenin red him to believe in the rationar capacity of the  

> conmon

man, the Russian revolutionary in him was deeply 

suspicious, conternptuous and fearful of the people. nE  

> 71

Gorky, in Ibid, No L77 , Nov 10th (23,) Lgl-7, in 

Page, Lenin, 80.   

> 72 Thomas

T. Hammond, ilLeninist Authoritarianism 

Before the Revorutionrf, in simmons, continuity and chanqe, 

> L44.

E John 

Organizationrl 

> 7L.

Ehrenberg, rrl,enin and the Politics of   

> (43 (r-)

, Spring Ls79') in Science and Society. 4L 

Lenin did not share the same ideas as Marx on 

consciousness, the party, and the revolution. He altered 

Marx's writings to suit the conditions in Russia. Lenin 

apptied Marxism to his particular moment in history; to his particular situation in Russia. Lenin was a voluntarist.   

> He wanted

to speed history up. He did believe in the 

historical role of the proletariat but he did not want to 

pass through capitalism (as a bourgeois stage). Lenin 

sought a revolution to destroy the old order. He was 

unclear on and less urgent about the building of a new 

society. In short he was politically notivated where Marx    

> was hurnanely and

socially motivated. Lenin believed that the proletariat needed to be guided, and thought that they should be guided by a rrVanguard Partyrr of professional 

revolutionaries. Lenin wanted to seize state power and use 

it. He was very much a Jacobin who believed in Marx but was 

greatly influenced by the Russian Revolutionary tradition. CIAPTER THREE: I,ENTN'g UARXIST INFLUENCES 

The heart of this thesis will be covered in the 

following four chapters, tracing Lenin's ideas back to 

Russian Revolutionaries. Before that can be done, dD 

examination of Lenin's Marxism must be undertaken. The 

first chapter of this Thesis concluded that Lenin made some 

fundamental, as opposed to minor, alterations to Marxist 

theory. However, when dealing with Lenin, the founder of 

the Wor1d's first rrMarxist Countryrr, one cannot ignore the 

Marxist influences that acted upon hin. This chapter will briefly cover a nurnber of irnportant points which must be  

> made

before proceeding to the core of this thesis. Three 

questions must be answered to give a good background to 

Lenints Marxist influences: Why did Marxism, dS a political theory, develop in Russia?, What, was unique about Russian 

Marxism and who $/ere its proponents?, and lastly, How did 

Lenin becorne a Marxist? Some of the reasons why Lenin 

incorporated so rnuch Russian thought into his rrMarxismrr will 

be brought out when these questions are answered. 

Backward in almost every respect, Russi-a in the 1880's v.ras not the place that Marx or Engels had in mind  

> 42 43
> when

talking about the advent of a social revolution. 

However, the 188O,s sahr the genesis of the spread of Marxism 

in Russia, which would eventually lead to the Bolshevik 

seizure of power in L9L7. Most of those concerned would 

have scoffed at the suggestion of the rise of Social  

> Democracy

in Russia. Whereas Social Democracy required a

large proportion of the population to be workers and the 

establishment of capitalism, Russia was mostly composed of 

peasants and was predominately an agrarian society. Why 

then did Social Dernocracy develop in Russia? The failure of 

the populists and the merits of Marxism itself, which 

virtually guaranteed success as history progressed, were the 

primary reasons why Social Democracy arose in Russia. The populists were the section of the intelligentsia  

> whj-ch

advocated a social transformation of Russian society.  

> The

key class of society for the populists was the peasant 

class. Populism arose out of debates between Slavophiles 

and Westerners. The Slavophiles were those who believed Russia was unique and thus would develop differently than 

other countries. The Westerners, ds their name denotes, 

believed that Russia should folIow the path of the West.  

> The

populists inherited the Slavophiles' messianisrn. They 

believed that Russia would lead the World to socialisn by 

taking its own path, i.e., avoiding capitalism and basing 

sociarism on the commune and the arte-Z.. Almost no t'thinking 

personrr in the rnid-to-late L8O0's escaped the influence of 44 

populist thought.Ta The populists evolved through the  

> 18OO's

and by the end of the 1860's two main schools of 

populist thought had evolved: The followers of Lavrov, who 

stressed that the main purpose of the intelligentsia was to 

educate the people, and the followers of Bakunin, who wanted 

to appeal to the peasantst feelings and emotions and prepare 

them for revolution. In L873-74, a large number of populists, following Lavrovts advice, rrwent to the peoplerr to enlighten them and 

give them confidence. These populists were mostly young and 

idealistic. They descended on towns, villages, and the 

countryside and tried to educate the people to the 

poputistst ideals while living amongst then. However, the 

peasants, for their part, thought these young people were 

quite insane and turned most of them over to the police. It is very important to note that the only areas where the 

populists had any success were in the towns and villages  

> among

the workers. The failure of these pilgrinages turned 

the populists away from Lavrov's teachings and towards 

Bakunin's.fr This was the first defeat in the decline of 

populism and was a step forward for Marxisrn as many of the 

intelligentsia began to reexamine their views in Iight of  

> 7a

abbott Gleason, Young Russia: The Genesis of 

Russian Radicalism in the 1860's. (New York: The Viking 

Press, 1980), 75-76. 

E Leopold H. Haimson, The Russian Marxists and the 

origins of Bolshevisn. (Canbridge: Harvard University 

Press, L955), L2-1-4. 45 

populism's failures. Some populists, as a result of an 

idealized notion of the peasantry, had begun to realize that the peasants were not as rrnoblerr as they had believed and 

certainly not as revolutionary. 

In L876 Zemlya i Volya, Land and Freedom, was formed 

to attempt to consolidate aII of the various populist 

organizations into one party. With the failure of the 

pilgrirnages, the populists, especially the radical ones,  

> began

to call for more terrorist acts. The belief was that if the Tsar was assassinated, the regime would crumble. The 

rrterroristsrr were very much under the influence of the ideas 

of Peter Nikitich Tkachev. Tkachev preached violence and 

the need for an elite, not the peasants themselves, to create a revolution.76 Lenin, ds illustrated in Chapter Two and later in Chapter Four, followed closely in Tkachev's 

footsteps. within the party there was dissension on using 

terrorism. In L879, dt the partyts Voronezh Congress, 

Andrei Zheliabov defended terrorism as a struggle to force 

the Tsar to grant constitutional rights. This in turn would 

allow mass agitation. only ceorgii V. Plekhanov spoke out 

against hirn. Plekhanov claimed terrorism was rash and 

impetuous and would drain the revolutionary movement of its drive.z Pavel Axelrod eventually sided with Plekhanov, 

as did some others. The party split into two factions,  

> Tkachev

will be discussed in chapter 4.  

> Haimson, The

Russian Marxists, L5-L7.  

> 76 T7 46
> Narodnaya

Volyar ot the Peoples' WiII, which advocated the 

use of terrorism, and Chernyi Peredel, or the Black 

Partition, Ied by Plekhanov. It is interesting to note here 

that white the leaders of Black Partition eventually became 

the leading Marxists, it was the Peoples' Willts form of organization that the Bolsheviks later used.  

> The

Peoples' WiII carried out a number of rrpublicrl 

executions but their real goal was the assassination of the 

Tsar. on March lst, 1881, they succeeded in killing the 

Tsar. However, this act led to their downfa1l. Firstly, the peasants did not revolt as they had believed. In fact, the peasants saw the Tsar as their rrlittle fatherrr and 

grieved his death. As weII as thisr Do constitution was 

granted. Alexander II had been about to enact some reforms 

but after his death these were shelved indefinitely. The 

Peoples' will also lost most of its leadership as a result of a crackdown by the police after the assassination. This 

event signalled the long decline of the populist   

> movement.T8 The

Black Partition did not fare much better. 

They formed their groups' headquarters in exile in Geneva. 

Eventually the remnants of it formed the Marxist 

Emancipation of Labour Group in 1883. The failure of populisn left the door wide open for the proponents of a new 

theory to step in. However, the first step in the rise of  

> 78 Derek

in the 1880's. 

1986),pp 37-4L. 

Offord, The Russian Revolutionary Movement  

> (New

York: Cambridge University Press, 47 

Marxism in Russia was the conversion of its two leading 

menbers, Plekhanov and Axelrod.   

> Plekhanov hras

the son of a Hussar captain. He first 

gained respect and notoriety when he gave a speech at Kazan  

> Square

on December sixth, L876. After his involvement in that demonstration he was forced to flee to Germany for a

year. on his return he became the editor of Land and 

Freedom's journal. He laid a 1ot of emphasis in his articles on the revolutionary potential of the Russian 

industrial workinq class, while stiII adhering to  

> rrpeasantismtt.Te

After the split of Zemlva i Vo1va, h€ 

edited Chernyi Peredel with Axelrod. Plekhanov was already 

swaying towards Marxism while he was stilL a populist Ieader. The following speech illustrates Plekhanov's 

realization of the irnportance of the growing size of the 

industrial rnasses: 

Russian industry is not standing still. . Need 

is tearing the peasantry from the land and pushing 

it to the factory, to the plant . in this  

> connectj-on

the center of gravity of economic 

questions is shifting in the direction of industrial centers. The distribution of our forces must 

conform to this organic process. Fortified in the 

factory and in the countrysider w@ wiII take a

position in accord not only with the contemporary 

situation but also with the entire course of the  

> economic development

of Russia.80 

Plekhanov became converted to Marxism through scientific and 

statistical study. His rrpeasantismrr arguments on the   

> 79 Haimson, The

Russian Marxists , 36-39.  

> 8o

as quoted in Ibid., 42-43. 48 

village conmune 

contradictions a

starting block f 

reading Orlovts 

treated the commune as free of internal 

nd thus it could act as the objective 

or the social revolution. However, after 

obshchina ownershin in the District of  

> Moscow,

his arguments were no longer statistically valid. After this, Plekhanov immersed himself in the works of 

> uarx.81

Axelrod was not converted to Marxism in the same way 

as Plekhanov but what he did share with him was the 

development of Marxist ideas while he was still a populist leader. In L874, Paul Axelrod fled to Germany and was warned 

by the emigre populists, not to pay any attention to the  

> German

working class movement. However, Axelrod did not  

> heed

their advice and was impressed by the way the German 

working class met in thousands to defy authority in an 

autocratic regirne.s2 After Plekhanov had been forced to flee to Switzerland, Axelrod drew up a program for a rrGreat 

Russian Society of Land And Freedomrr and took it to the 

exile community for approval. The exiles rejected it, calling it reformist. The Program outlined the importance 

of the industrial working class in the bringing about of a

socialist revolution. They said of it, I'This is not 

Populism but Social Democrdcyrr.83 This first hand view of  

> 81

rbid., 4L-42.  

> 82

rbid. , 36-37 . 

> 83

as quoted in lbid., 40-41. 49  

> how

the working class could be successful in becoming a

political identity is what led Axelrod to accept Marxism. 

As the populists' hopes began to seem more 

unattainable, a few new groups looked to the west and its socialist writings, and not solely to Marx. once populists  

> hrere

prepared to concede that populisn had failed in both 

its forms, propaganda and terrorism, then Marx and his writings could be viewed in Russia in a new light. It could 

be viewed as a doctrine from which not only Europe, but Russia could draw some conclusions.& A number of secret 

societies and student circles were formed to discuss these  

> new

theories and to actively criticize the government. The 

works of Marx which hrere most widely read at this tine hrere 

Capital and The Communist Manifesto. 

The first to seriously examine the possibility of applying Marxism, a Western Social Democratic Theory, to 

Russian conditions $rere the populist emigres. It was easy 

for many of them to convert to Marxism as it advocated 

revolution from below. For many of them it was populism, 

with the exception of substituting the proletariat for the 

peasantry.ss This allowed many of them to accept the 

failure of the pilgrimages and the failure of the peasantry 

to revolt. They were able to see this failure as a result of the peasantry not being a revolutionary class. The 

Offord, The Russian Revolutionary Movement, 119. 

rbid., LL7. 

u

> 85 50

minimal success that there was occurred in the towns among 

the urban workers. Marxism was originally written of approvingly by such populists as Tkachev, Lavrov, and 

Mikhailovsky, but they never considered it applicable to Russia. However, by the 1880's, Marxism offered some 

appealing aspects. It offered a deterministic view of 

history which lessened the capacity and the responsibility of the individual to effect social change. Also, Marxism seemed to offer, unlike Populism, the triurnph of socialism 

due to the progression of history. Lastly, the proletariat  

> was more

responsive than the peasantry, which Marx and 

Engels covered by writing that the peasantry was 

reactiondty, not revolutionary. They coined the phrase, 

rrthe idiocy of rural life.r'e 

Russian society was changing. As capitalism nade 

more inroads into Russian economic life, the political life also changed. Populism suffered a decline in adherence 

while Marxism began to rise. Marx saw ideas as weapons 

which simply needed a material force to wield them. The 

peasants had failed to offer a material force to transform 

populist ideas into social transformation. The Russian 

revolutionaries had to turn to another downtrodden class in society, the proletariat, and with that switch in Emphasis,  

> Marxism

strengthened its foothold.  

> 86

rbid. , r-r.9-r-2 o . 51 

what is important to cover briefly is what Marx and 

Engels wrote about Russia during the late 1870's and 1880's. 

Both of them doubted whether Russia could have a social 

revolution on its own or whether Russia had to follow the 

path of the west.87 Engels was inclined to follow the  

> argument

that Russia had to follow the same path as everyone 

else and would have to suffer capitalisn to achieve 

socialism. Marx himself was less sure. He acknowledged 

that Russia was very distinct and believed that it was 

possible for Russia to avoid the capitalist stage, but only 

if there were simultaneous revolutions in the West.s This 

Iine of thought comes out in his reply to Vera Zasulich, a

populist-Marxist emigre, that was written on March 8th' 

1881. Marx states, 

The analysis given in Capital assigns no reasons 

for or against the vitality of the rural community, 

but the special research into this subject which I

conducted, the materials for which I obtained from 

original sources, has convinced me that this  

> comrnunity

is the mainspring of Russia's social 

reqeneration, but in order that it might function as 

such one would first have to elininate the 

deleterious influences which assail it fron every 

quarter and then to ensure the conditions norrnal for   

> spontaneous developrnent. 89

However, the late 1800's saw the increase of 

industrialization in Russia and the subsequent growth of the  

> 87

For examples of this see Marx's letters to Vera 

Zasulich and Engels' polenic with Tkachev.  

> 88

rbid., L23-L2s  

> 8e

as quoted in Tucker, Marx-Engels Reader, 675. 52 

proletariat. Capitalism began to grow in Russia which 

dispelled the idea that there was a possibility of Russia 

Itskippingtt capitalism due to the influence and protection 

provided by the conmune. 

The first Marxist organization was formed by the 

formerly populist ernigres. Plekhanov, Axelrod and Zasulich 

were the key members of Osvobozhdenie Truda, or the 

Ernancipation of Labour Group. Plekhanov, once he had  

> immersed

himself in the works of Marx, turned on his former 

colleagues, the populists. He applied his new found knowledge of statistics to counter some of the populists' statements. The populists claimed that there were onry 800 

000 industriar workers in Russia at the last census out of  

> 100

nillion people. Plekhanov doubted these figures' reliabirity. He craimed that these figures hrere arrived at by using poor counting techniques. As we1l as this, cottage 

industries were not incruded and arthough they may not have  

> been

united by capital, they were enslaved by it. Lastly, 

Plekhanov craimed that the bourgeoisie often hid the true  

> number

of workers for tax purposes. These ideas and others, 

including the deficiency of comrnunar rand-hording were best 

explained in Plekhanovts two najor works which were entitred 

Socialism and the Political Struggle (1883) and Our 

Differences (1885). Prekhanov stated that the future of 

Russia was capitalism, but that capitalism wourd inevitably 

Iead to socialisrn. He saw that the job of the 53 

intelligentsia was to guide the proletariat as a

revolutionary force and establish a class consciousness  

> among them.go

Despite these early attacks by Plekhanov, the 

Emancipation of Labour Group did not fare very weII until the 1890's. By then it had becorne certain that the Peoplets 

will had failed to reach their objectives.el The 

Emancipation of Labour Group had to compete with groups 

inside of Russia for adherents. Many groups studied non-

Marxist socialists and populists. only around 1890 did  

> Marxism

begin to spread throughout the educated population 

syrnpathetic to the ideas of reform and revolution, the 

intelligentsia. Plekhanovts conversion to Social Democracy 

brought him ironically closer to his o1d enemies, the 

Peoplets WiII. Having read Marx, Plekhanov was able to see 

the use for terror and violence, but in a different way than 

the populists. Terrorism could be used for revolutionary 

purposes but not merely as political terror to assassinate 

particular individuals. Plekhanov had a dualisrn to his nature, something which Lenin would pick up on. He had a

balance between accepting the Marxist view of history as 

determinist and the notion that revolution can be prepared 

for actively. He stated that, rrOnly organized revolutionary 

forces seriously influenced the course of events.rr But Haimson, The Russian Marxists, 2t-22. 

rbid. , 43. 

> 90
> 91 54

while Plekhanov would say that we only need rrswim with the 

current of histofytt, Lenin would say that we must rrswim 

against i;rr.ez This bturring of ideological lines was 

prevalent in aII the organizations of this time. Many may 

have claimed to be Marxist while still holding on to populist or other socialist ideas. For at this time most 

Russian revolutionaries did not fully understand Marx's 

works. Often they used pieces of Marx's theories to justify their own views. one could even caII them ttjigsaw 

socialistsrr for their piecing together of various ideas. It is thus easy to see how Lenin's thought strayed so far from 

Marx's. What is important to note here is a key difference  

> between

Plekhanov and Axelrod. Axelrod ernphasized the 

notions of free development and free maturation of 

proletarian consciousness. Plekhanov, on the other hand,  

> emphasized

the factors that would make the proletariat a

revolutionary force.e3 Lenin picked up such ideas directly 

frorn Plekhanov and stressed the political nature of the 

revolution. They are Marxist ideas but they are only a

selected part of the whole picture. These early Marxists 

created the atmosphere and groundwork to make Marxism 

acceptable to the next generation of Russian 

revolutionaries, What is important for the purposes of this thesis is not how the party developed, but that the party  

> ez

rbid., 44-46.  

> e3

rbid., 4s. 55  

> developed

from groundwork laid by these early Marxists and 

that it was from these early Marxists, including student 

circles, that Lenin learned Marxism. 

Lenin's thought was by no means set frorn the 

beginning. Many Soviet scholars would have us believe that 

Lenin was a Marxist when he was a teenager. This simply is not true. Lenints thought evolved to form what becarne known 

as Bolshevism. Richard Pipes has put forth the idea that Lenin's intellectual evolution progressed through four 

phases. They are as follows: 1) L887-I892i Lenin in his early years syrnpathized with the terrorist organization, The 

Peoples' WilI. 2) 1892-1893i Lenin lost faith in the 

peasantry (as a revolutionary class) and turned toward the 

proletariat as a revolutionary force, but he still clung to 

terrorist ideals and was nostly concerned with the seizure 

of power. 3) 1895-1899i Lenin became a full-fledged Social  

> Democrat

of the Western type. He believed in socialisn as a 

> broad-based

novement. He realized the need for an alliance with the bourgeoisie and he recognized that socialism  

> presupposes

democracy. Much of what Lenin believed in this period, he learned from the exiles. 4) 1899-; By this tine 

Lenin had lost faith in the ability of the working class to rise spontaneously and the bourgeoisie to do anything. He 

fused his Jacobin ideas, from the Peoples' WiII, with 56 

Russian Marxism to form Bolshevism.94 This conception of 

the development of Lenin's thought effectively conveys the 

point. some will argue over the dates of this chronology, 

but what it does show is that Lenin was first a populist.  

> He

then, Iike Plekhanov and Axelrod, had doubts about the peasantry while st,ill a populist. Again, like Plekhanov and 

Axelrod, h€ soon gave up his populism for Marxism. However, 

Plekhanov and Axelrod went no further than this. The 

activities, or inactivities, of the workers, and the fight 

against the Economists and Revisionists, which will be 

discussed later in the chapter, disillusioned Lenin. From 

this disillusionment arose Bolshevi-sm. 

Lenin first read Marx in the faII of 1888 while in 

Kazan, but he did not seriously become interested in Marx 

until around L892. The previous year had seen a famine 

occur in the regions around where Lenin lived. The famine 

started a debate between remaining populists and the  

> upcoming

Marxists, Ied by Peter Struve. The populists 

clairned that capitalisrn had no future in Russia. The fanine 

led to the impoverishment of the peasantry and the 

destruction of cottage industries. They claimed that this  

> was

proof of capitalism underrnining its own market and, 

therefore, capitalism had no future in Russia. The  

> ea

Richard Pipes, rrThe origins of 

Intellectual Evolution of Young Leninrr in editor, Revolutionary Russia. (Canbridge: 

University Press, L968) , 26-27. 

Bolshevism: The 

Richard Pipes, 

> Harvard 57

Marxists, Ied by Struve saw the results of the famine as 

results of capitalism conquering the countryside.e5 Lenin  

> was

studying when these debates started, but by November, 

1891, after he had passed the bar examinations, h€ applied 

himself to it. Lenin, at this tirne, came up with his own 

conclusions. In his earliest writings, around 1893, Lenin 

declared that, rrCapitalism already at the present time is the basic background of Russian economic life. "e5 This 

conclusion was reached by Lenin using agricultural, not 

industrial data. Lenin was influenced by the works of V.E. PostnikoveT, who had demonstrated that the village was 

splitting into bourgeoisie and proletariat, on the basis of 

the exploitation of hired labour. 

The conclusion that Russia was already capitalist 

had three irnportant ranifications. If Russia was indeed 

capitalist, then the peasantry could no longer be relied 

upon as revolutionaries. As well as this, Russia, if it was 

indeed capitalist, had no need for political liberties. Lastly, ds a capitalistic country, Russia was ready for the 

type of social revolution envisaged by Marx in the Communist 

Manifesto.es Lenin wrote in 1894, that rrThe Russian 

> 95

on Struve Pipes, rrThe origins of Bolshevismrr, 37. For more 

see Appendix III. 

as quoted in Pipes, rrThe origins of Bolshevismrr, 

see Appendix III. Pipes, rrThe origins of Bolshevismfl ' 38-39 . 

> 97 98
> 38. 58
> economic

order is a bourgeois system from which there is only one way out . narnely the struggle of the 

proletariat against the bourgeoisie.t,ee At this early 

stage, Lenin still held on to the rrpopulistr beliefs on 

terrorism. His writings stress the revolutionary aspects of 

socialism. At this early stage Lenin basicarly substituted 

the proletariat for the peasantry into his populist ideals.  

> However,

he would soon take a more mainstrearn view. By 

1895, Lenin had become a western-sty1e social Democrat. By 

this tine Lenin had realized that Russia was not capitarist yet. A major factor in his 'conversion, was a trip abroad 

to see the German working crass Movement and to meet the 

exire Emancipation of Labour Group. Lenin gave a favourabre 

impression to the exires. The one point which they disliked 

about hirn was his outright hostility to the liberars and 

they helped hirn to accept the notion that they had to work 

together to bring socialism about in the end. Lenin had not 

fully liked struve's ideas but now he was deterrnined to work 

with struve and others towards the formation of a Russian 

social Democratic party.100 However, events in the rnid 

1890's where to change Leninrs opinions on the role of spontaneity among the workers and on arignrnent with the 

liberals.  

> ee

as quoted in lbid. , 39.  

> 1oo

rbid. , 42-43. 59  

> The

Legal Marxists were those who stressed the 

historical determinisrn of Marxism over the revolutionary 

aspects of Marxism, so as to IegaIIy print Marxist tracts in Russia. They gave little, if any attention to the 

revolutionary aspects of Marxism. They were led by Struve and even Plekhanov used this tactic. However, Lenin was  

> opposed

to this tactic, ds he favoured the stressing of the 

revolutionary aspects.l0l Watering down Marxism to publish 

it legally was a way of publically publishing it, but it also weakened the content by not stressing the revolutionary 

aspects and often even leaving them out. From 1893-1895 

there were a series of strikes throughout Russia. These 

strikes forewarned that the proletariat rnight not wait for history to progress, as the socialists would. These strikes illustrated that the proletariat indeed had a revolutionary 

potential but that if left on their own' it would be 

rnisdirected. For the Legal Marxists, these strikes showed 

that their theory no longer portrayed reaIity.102 The 

strikes were revolutionary in that they called for economic 

and political change. The workers indeed had a revolutionary 

potential which they were not afraid to use. 

fn 1893 a Marxist circle was formed by Yuri Martov 

and his associates. once they had studied the works of 

Marx, Plekhanov and Axelrod, they renamed their circle, the    

> 101 Haimson, The

Russian Marxists, 54-55.  

> 102

rbid., 57-59. 60 

Petersburg croup of Emancipation of Labour.l03 Martov was 

subsequently arrested, and due to the confessions of a 

> member

of his circle, was exiled in Siberia until 1895. On 

his return to Petersburg in 1895, Martov, with others in the city including Lenin, formed the Union of Struggle for the Emancipation of Labour. This Union would help the 

Social Democrats to cope with the workers' outbursts of 

energy.loa The Socia1 Democrats were in agreement on the 

need for agitation in the factories, but they also disagreed 

on various points. Leninr one of the stariki or rrold menrl 

(though most were 25-30), believed that the workers' 

spontaneity would never, oD its own grow into political 

consciousness.l05 What was needed was an organized, active 

Social Dernocratic leadership. He was also convinced that 

what was needed vtas a national Social Democratic 

organization to better fend off the secret police. Lenin's 

fears were substantiated when almost all of the major 

figures in the Petersburg Group, including Lenin and Martov, 

were arrested in December of 1895 and January of 1896.106  

> 103

Haimson, 7L-73. Martov was the editor(Kremer the 

author) of a parnphlet entitled 'rOn Agitation, which was 

later used by the Economists to defend their position.  

> 104

rbid., 7s. 105 Lenin believed that the workers would be too 

concerned with the magrenfrage or the rrstomaeh questJ-onrr. 

That is that the workers will be too concerned by daily material needs. They will desire bread and butter over 

social change.  

> 106

Haimson, 7 5-7 6 . 6L  

> However,

while Lenin and Martov were in exile in Siberia, 

Social Democracy did not stand still. Lenin, by this time, had begun to accept the 

orthodox Social Democratic position. He was willing to work 

with the liberals to bring about political reform and thus 

eventually socialisrn. However, over the next eight years 

Lenin would develop his theory of Bolshevism, best explained 

by his 1903 work, What is to Be Done?. The primary 

catalysts in this change were the fights against Economism 

and Revisionism. Economism was a movement which believed 

that the workers desires should determine what the Social  

> Democrats

were fighting for. If the workers wanted economic 

improvements, ds they did, this should be the goals of the 

Social Democrats. Political change should only be sought  

> when

the workers had become politically conscious. The 

Economists in short were apolitical. The arrest of the 

Ieaders of the Petersburg organization allowed the 

Ieadership to pass to the youthful advocates of Economism. 

The advocates of rrspontaneitytt were in control.107 

with the Economists on the rise, the remaining 

politiki (advocates of the political struggle) agreed, 

though some reluctantly, with Lenin on the need to form a

nation-wide organization. After a great deal of procedural 

and theoretical deliberation, the various delegates decided 

upon convoked an all-Russian congress and on March 1st, 1898  

> 107

rbid. , 76-77 .62 

they announced the formation of the Russian Socia1 

Democratic Labour Party (RsDLp). This victory against the  

> Economists

would prove to be short-rived. soon after its birth, the central organizations of the party hrere 

compretely destroyed by the tsarist police and the entire  

> membership

of its centrar committee arrested. This meant 

that almost all of the intelligentsia who advocated a

poriticar struggle were in exile, in siberia or abroad, and 

the Economists had firled their praces.l08 The Economists 

were on the ascendenscy everlruhere. They succeeded in getting Struvets Manifesto, for the RSDLp, rejected by the Petersburg union, and even gained contror of the union of 

Russian social Democrats Abroad, further isorating plekhanov and Axerrod. The Economistst argument was based on the 

tactics and organization of sociar Democracy as a refrection of the working-class movementrs natural growth.loe 

However, a greater threat was to come from the Revisionist 

Movenent, corning from Germany, which struck at the heart of 

Marxist Orthodoxy. 

rn the rate 1890's German social Democracy had come 

under attack from within. Eduard Bernstein, a reading 

Marxist theorist, had attacked some of the basic tenets of 

Marxist orthodoxy. His argument was based on the fact that socialism is immanent, and therefore can be achieved through  

> 108,

rbid., go-g1.  

> loe

rbid. , 8l--83. 63 

evolutionary, as opposed to revolutionary, means. The  

> argument

could be sumrnarized, as sinilar to what the  

> Economists

had been advocating, that rrthe movement was 

everything, the final goal-nothing at aII.tt110 The 

Revisionists did have a final goal but believed that it 

could be achieved without revolution. This spurned a

Revisionist movement in Russia. What was especially 

dangerous about revisionism, was that it did not originate  

> among

the praktiki, but among enlightened intellectuals including, Peter Struve, Tugan-Baranovskii, Bulgakov, and 

Berdyaev. They acted as rrconstructive criticsrr of Marxisrn   

> and made

claims such as the fact that if socialism was 

immanent, there was no need to assign the leadership of progressive forces exclusively to the proletariat.lll Struve, and many of the Revisionists would later join the 

ranks of the emerging liberal movement. What unexpectedly, and unwantedly, occurred was that the Economists used parts 

of Revisionisrn to justify their own position. fn 1899, the most extreme Economist position was circulated in anti-

orthodox circles, becoming known as rrThe Credorr. The Credo  

> was

compiled by E.D. Kuskova, one of the new Econornist 

leaders of the Union of Russian SociaI Democrats Abroad. 

Its two rnajor conclusions were that the Russian Marxists  

> '110

Ibid.  

> 111

rbid. 

> Names.

84. For more on 

84-85. AIso see 

Bernstein see Appendix III 

Appendix III, Appendix of 64 

should encourage the economic struggle and that they must 

end their political exclusivism. Kuskova and her supporters wanted the looseninq of restrictive bonds and the 

organization of the party. Axelrod attacked the Economist 

position, arguing that if the Social Democrats did ally 

themselves with the liberals, there were two possibilities. 

The liberals could turn out to be weak, in which case 

absolutism would continue, or the liberals could dominate 

the movement, exploiting it for the rrpossessing 

classest'.112 However, neither Axelrod nor Plekhanov 

offered an effective attack, and response, to the Credo. 

This was left to Vladirnir Ulyanov, a rather young starik,  

> whose

revolutionary name was Lenin. 

Lenin's attack on the Credo was the strongest 

reaction to it. Plekhanov and Axelrod were too wrapped up 

Iooking to the future and were caught unaware by the turn of 

events. A copy of the Credo was srnuggled into Siberia where 

Lenin and other Marxists were serving their adrninistrative 

exiles. Lenin was furious once he read the Credo and 

immediately wrote a criticism of it which was endorsed by 

the other exiles. His reply became known as rrThe Protest of 

the Seventeenrr. It struck at the core of the Revisionist 

argument. The Revisionists argued that Marxist practice in 

Western Europe was only a reflection of existing practice. 

That Marxism rrwent with the f lowtt. Lenin argued the  

> 112

rbid., g6-88. 65 

opposite, that Marxisrn had not followed the path of least 

resistance, that Marxism appeared when apotitical socialism  

> was

dominant (e.g; Owen, Fourier). For Lenin, ds Plekhanov  

> and

Axelrod had been stressing, Social Democracy had two 

tasks, the overthrow of absolutism, and the abolition of 

capitalisn. Of these two, the most imrnediate and important 

task was the overthrow of the autocracy.113 The autocracy  

> needed

to be overthrown to achieve political emancipation. 

For Lenin, to leave the workers to spontaneity was 

dangerous. Lenin, at this stage, had already started to  

> merge

his Russian ideas with Marxism and soon would create 

Iskra, which would lead to the formation of the Bolsheviks.  

> The

year 1900 was significant for Lenin. By this time he had returned to his old ideas and no longer believed 

in cooperating with the liberals. He saw the liberals as a

threat as they would either dominate the movement or fail to 

help overthrow the autocracy. His negotiations with Struve, 

during the founding of the RSDLP, had made him realize that the liberals were really a reactionary class.114 The roots 

of Lenints distrust of the liberals can be found in the 

writings of Chernyshevsky, dS will be pointed out in Chapter 

Four. While sti}l in exile, Lenin had formulated a plan which would bring social democracy out of its crisis. He 

wanted to create a nation-wide newspaper (fskra) which would  

> 113

rbid. , 9o-9r-.  

> 114

Theen, Lenin, 97. 66 

help to consolidate and organize the Russian Social 

Democratic movement.l15 Lenin collaborated with Martov and 

Potresov in the creation of fskra. fskra was to provide 

Lenin with a forum for expressing his views, now dominated 

by the themes of the need for leadership and 

organization.116 This was made apparent in the first issue 

of fskra, where Lenin, using that pseudonym for the first time, wrote the following:  

> The

task of Socia1 Democracy is to instill Social Democratic ideas and political consciousness into the mass of the proletariat and to organize a

revolutionary party unbreakably tied to the  

> spontaneous

labour movement. . Not a single 

class in history has reached power without thrusting 

forward its political leaders, without advancing 

Ieading representatives capable of directing and 

organizing the movement. We must train people who 

will dedicate to the revolution not a free evening 

but the whole of their lives; we must prepare an 

organization so strong that we can enforce a firm division of labour in the various aspects of our 

> work.117

This articre, from the first issue of Tskra, contains some 

key ideas of Lenin. This article is representative of 

Bolshevism. rt is concerned with power and the seizing of 

it, not with emancipation or development. Lenin, in this first issue of Iskra, had already started to develop his ideas on orglanization and revorution that he would gather   

> 1ls Haimson, The

Russian Marxists , LL7.  

> 116

Theen, Lenin, 98. Also see Appendix of Names for  

> more

on Potresov and Martov.  

> 117

Lenin, ds quoted in Haimson, The Russian 

Marxists, 119. Dec, 1900. 67 

of into his work, What is To Be Done?. Iskra and a najority its adherents were to provide Lenin with the support to 

openly break with rrun-Marxistrr groups and form the 

Bolshevik Party. 

Lenints ideas and knowledge of Marxism were shaped 

from his own personal experiences. He learned his Marxism 

from former populists such as Plekhanov and Axelrod. His 

path to Marxism was, therefore' already fundarnentally 

different from his mentors. Lenin's earlier influences  

> haunted

him throughout his life, and by 1900 he could no 

Ionger hold to allying himself with the liberals. Lenin's  

> What

is To Be Done? presented his ideas on the application 

of Marxism to Russia. Lenints background was not Marxist 

but revolutionary. The following three chapters wilI deal 

with the non-Marxist influences on Lenin. What this chapter 

has illustrated is that even Lenints Marxist influences  

> were

not completely Marxist. His background was such that 

he could easily have confused Marxist and non-Marxist or 

part-Marxist revolutionaries .

Lenin had to face the onslaught of Econonism, which 

rested on faith in spontaneity. For Lenin this was the 

greatest heresy, Ieaving the working class to develop on 

their own. However, the greatest threat came from 

Revisionism, which was non-revolutionary in nature. In attempting to ward off Economism, Revisionism, the liberals,  

> and

the State, Lenin developed his theory of Bolshevism. 68 

Lenin truly believed in some Marxist principles, but as 

chapter one illustrated, he differed from Marx in many 

respects. To face these challenges, Lenin returned to his old populist heritage and incorporated their ideas on the 

class, party, and the revolution into his theory, 

> Bolshevism. 69

Belinsky's'enlightened individuals',  

> Chernyshevsky's and

Dubroliubovts rrpure peoplerr or   

> rrnew menrr,

Mikhailovksy's rrtrue intelligentsiarr, Lavrov's rrcritically thinking individuals[, 

Shelgunov's rrmen of thought", Tkachev's ttenlightened 

minorityrr, Lenints rrtribunes of the peoplerr and 

Polonskyts ttintelligentsiatr are basically different variations on the same therne. This theme centered around the search for a group of people hostile to the existing social order, united exclusively by 

ideological bonds, and ready to lead and serve the  

> masses

(proletariat or narod) in the total reconstruction of Russian society. tt (as quoted in Vladirnir C.Nahirny, The Russian Intelligentsia. New 

Brunswick: Transaction Books, 1983), 15.) 70  

> Chernyshevsky's

harsh, fIat, du1I, humourless, 

grating sentences, his preoccupation with concrete 

detail, his self-discipline, his dedication to the 

material and moral good of his feIlow-men, the grey, 

self-effacing personality, the tireless, passionate, 

devoted, minute industry, the hatred of style or of 

any concessions to the graces, the unquestionable 

sincerity, utter self-forgetfulness, brutal directness, indifference to the claims of private Iife, innocence, self-sacrifice, created the image 

that later became the prototype of the Russian 

revolutionary hero and martyr. More than any other 

publicist he was responsible for drawing the final line between rrusrt and rrthemrr. His personality and 

outlook set their seal upon two generations of  

> Russian

revolutionaries; not least upon Lenin, who  

> admired hirn

devotedly. (Isiah Berlin, Russian 

Thinkers. (Toronto: Clarke, Irwin, and Company 

Ltd., L978), 2r4.) Chapter Four: Chernyshevsky and L,enin Few scholars would dispute the influence of Russian 

thinkers upon Lenin. However, this influence upon Lenin 

cannot easily be shown. RoIf Theen believes, ds do others, 

that there were two sources to Lenin's thought: Russian and 

Marxist. However, unlike most scholars, he believes that 

Russian revolutionary thinkers exerted a qreater influence 

upon Lenin than Marxist writings.118 There is little doubt  

> among

most scholars that Lenin held Chernyshevsky in high 

esteem. What this chapter will attempt to illustrate is that Lenin did not only read Chernyshevsky, but that he was 

greatly influenced by his ideas and that many of 

Chernyshevskyts ideas directly and indirectly can be found 

in Lenin's own writings. This chapter will first give a brief summation of 

Chernyshevsky's thought. It witl then illustrate the importance of Chernyshevsky to the Russian revolutionary 

movement. Chernyshevsky, himself a disciple of Be1insky, 

the great Russian critic, influenced an entire generation of 

Russian revolutionaries. Chernyshevsky was the rleaderrr of  

> 118

Theen, Len:!n, 72-73. 

> 7L 72

the rrnew menrr of Russian society. The ideas which Chernyshevsky and his associates, such as Dubroliubov, put 

forward found their way into most of the populist, and 

Iater, the Bolshevik programs. The idea that one should 

train experts to teach rrthe ignorant brothers 

stimulate them to resist authority, to revolt and destroy 

the old orderrr was a view held by rnany Russian thinkers such 

as Chernyshevsky in the 1860ts, Tkachev and Nechaev in the 

1880's, and the revolutionaries who followed these thinkers, 

including Lenin.1le 

The second section of this chapter will deal with 

the influence of Chernyshevsky upon Lenin. As the second 

chapter of this thesis concluded, Lenin and Marx held 

different views on the Party, Class, and the Revolution.  

> Chernyshevsky

did not write in these terms, but his ideas on 

the people and classr oD the role of the revolutionaries, 

and on the coming of the revolution, contain ideas which 

Lenin drew from. Some of the differences in Lenin's thought 

can be traced back to Chernyshevsky's writings and ideas. 

Lenin had read Chernyshevsky before he read Marx. He thus, 

learned aspects conmon to both, especially historical materialism, from Chernyshevsky, rather than frorn Marx. The 

final section of this chapter will be the conclusion, where  

> 1le

rsiah Berlin, Russian Thinkers. (Toronto: Clarke, 

Irwin, and Company Ltd., 1-978') , 2L4. 73 

the influence of chernyshevsky upon Lenin wirr be summed up.  

> CEERNYSHEVSKY

A BRIEF INTRODUCTION 

chernyshevsky was, with littIe doubt, the most 

important revolutionary thinker in Russia in the mid-tgoors.  

> He

represented a change in thought from the rnainstream 

revorutionary thinkers. The interligentsia, led by 

chernyshevsky, pushed the carr for reform to a carl for revolution. He led the intelligentsia into a new form of 

thinking and paved the way for the rise of the popurists. 

chernyshevsky represented a break with Herzen. Herzen was 

of an upper-crass background, of Russian nobility, and rived 

in exiIe. He arso tended towards liberalism or was too 

moderate for many revolutionaries. chernyshevsky, on the 

other hand, was of low-niddle crass background, like many 

revorutionaries after him, a former seminary student, and 

had different airns and goals than Herzen and his forrowers.  

> The

key components of Chernyshevsky's thought were 

his utilitarianism, his love of the Russian peopre, his 

concern for sociar change, and his carr for revolution. His 

first major work was his thesis *The Aesthetic Relations of 

Art to Reality". This work concruded that the role of art  

> was

not to portray scenes, but to portray reality. fn 

showing the misery of life for the peopre, art would serve 

as a criticism of society. chernyshevsky in this respect 74  

> was

a forerunner of Socialist Realism. He beli-eved that 

applying a utilitarian and political approach to art would 

benefit the masses. Chernyshevsky's [artrr not only 

criticized. the existing society but showed how things should 

be. He was able to turn more of his attention to social and 

political writings once Dubroliubov joined the staff of The  

> Contemporary

as a literary critic.l20 

The object of Chernyshevsky's writings and 

activities was the transformation of sporadic Russian 

peasant revolts into an organized revolution to change 

society. Chernyshevsky believed that a radical redistribution of land would allow for socialism to develop.  

> However,

he was a populist utopian in his belief in the 

linking of socialism with the peasant cornmune.l2l  

> Chernyshevsky was

the first Russian thinker to apply 

all problems, not in the abstract, but to their relation to the revolutionary cause. Chernyshevsky realized that reforrn 

would not do much to alleviate the socio-economic conditions 

of the bulk of the Russian population. He understood that 

emancipation could only be attained through revolutionary  

> 120

Leatherbarrow and offord, A Docurnentary History 

of Russian Thought, L94-L95.  

> 121

N. G. chernyshevsky, selected Philosophical Essays. (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1953), Lt--L2. 75 

means. Reform from above would not cure Russian society of 

its ills. Revolution was needsflrl22 

fn What is To Be Done?, Chernyshevsky illustrates that some proglress can be made through cooperatives and 

artels, but that what is needed for any real change is revolution, to be made by trained revolutionaries such as 

Rakhmetov. only in this way wirl sociar justice ever be 

brought to Russian society.l2r    

> CHERNYSIIEVSKY AND THE RUSSIAN REVoLUTIoNARY !,!oVEIIIENT

Chernyshevsky was a man of set convictions and the 

wirl to find means to herp them arong. He hated sravery, 

injustice, and irrationarity, aLr of which were prevarent in the Tsarist regime. Chernyshevsky, with the other rnew  

> menrr,

had seen the riberals' betrayal of the revorutionaries 

in L849 after the European revolutions of 1g4g. The 

emancipation of the serfs was something which the 

revolutionaries wanted. However, when the serfs were 

emancipated in L861, the cruerty of the emancipation was 

soon obvious. The serfs were emancipated but, did not get 

any rffreerr 1and. Rather, they had to pay the state back for 

compensating the landlords for the loss of the serfs. The  

> 122

rbid. , 5-G.  

> 123

These themes wiII be discussed in more detail Iater in the Chapter. 76 

serfs also tended to get the very worst land that the 

landlord could give up. The emancipation was a cruel 

trick.lza They were free, but were not! This hardened a

great deal of the revolutionaries of the time. 

The aftermath of the revolutions of 1848 and the  

> manner

in which the serfs were emancipated instilled a

distrust of the state, and, therefore, a distrust of reforms 

from above. This would later manifest itself in Lenin, as a

distrust and even hatred of the liberals. Only for a short 

period of time was Lenin able to work with the Russian 

Iiberals as was pointed out in Chapter Three. 

Chernyshevsky, having shared many common sources with Marx, 

in particular Hegel and Feuerbach, believed that the essence 

of history was a struggle between the classes. The state, 

for Chernyshevsky, as well as Marx, htas sinply a tool of the dominant class and could never, willingly or not, offer 

reforms which would change its nature. Chernyshevsky 

believed that the state would never be able to end its own 

dornination of society.l25 For one who is farniliar with 

Marxts conception of the state this sounds quite farniliar. Lenin, by reading Chernyshevsky, was able to prepare himself 

for reading Marx. Lenints distrust of reforrns from above 

was instilled in hin through reading Chernyshevsky, and 

through his own Iife experiences. Marx himself learned 

Berlin, Russian Thinkers, 225. 

rbid., 226. 

> 12t,
> '125 77

Russian for the primary purpose of being able to study 

Chernyshevsky in the original Russian.126 

Chernyshevsky has often been referred to as a

revorutionary democrat. However, to use the word democrat 

with Chernyshevsky is not an easy thing to do. 

Chernyshevsky believed that the rrpeoplerr were what was 

important. However, just, as he could not see the state reforming the system from above, he courd not see the masses 

as a force of change. For him, the masses were 

indifferent to all those ideas, whether of 

reaction, constitutionalism, or political revolution. . These ignorant, almost dumb, 

almost comatose masses do not play any part in most 

of the political affairs of weltei-n nur-ope.127 

Chernyshevsky believed that a sna11 group of people 

dedicated to the social revolution courd herp to arouse the 

people. This group of rrnew menrr wourd lead Russian society 

towards the path of revolution. Chernyshevsky evolved a

simple forrn of historical materialism. However, unlike 

Marx, he believed that Russia, by ernploying Western 

techniques and educating the masses, could reap over the 

capitarist stage of development. Like other tpopurists, he 

believed that the mir and arte-l. could be used as a basis for sociarism. But chernyshevsky, unrike Lenin, berieved that  

> 125

Avrahan yarmolinsky, Century of Russian Radicalism. Road To Revolution: A 

> (New

York: Macmillan, L959') , 

> 100.
> 127

chernyshevsky as 

The People, 63-63 quoted in Ulam, In The Name of 78 

the social revolution must come before political 

ref orms. 128  

> Many

of the young men of the tine, particularly students, found Chernyshevsky inspiring. They adnired him 

for his attempts to work out specific solutions to specific 

problems in terms of concrete statistical data, for his constant appeal to facts, and for his patient efforts to indicate that there were attainable, practical goals which 

should be pursued instead of a more desirable, yet 

unattainable state of affairs.l?e chernyshevsky was 

different than most of the revolutionaries which preceded 

him and not only in terms of ideas. Chernyshevsky endured a

great deal of suffering which was not only heroic, but which 

bordered on masochisrn. He was not only defiant, but fuII of 

resignation as well. When he had served ten years of his 

Siberian exile he was told that he could ask for a pardon.  

> He

replied, 

Thank, You. But, look, for what can I plead pardon. 

# i"".'="';"'fl::3'i='3rli"::i:'i :ffi=;Xi:i3u"?lI* that of the head of the Chief of the Po1ice, and how can 

I ask pardon for that?130 

Chernyshevsky would not change his views, even for 

pragrmatic reasons. For Chernyshevsky, dedication to the 

revolution was of utmost importance. Chernyshevksy, and  

> 128

Berlin, Russian Thinkers , 227.  

> 12e

rbid., 2zs  

> 130

as quoted in Ulam, The Bolsheviks, 55 79  

> many

Russian revolutionaries who followed him, believed that the acceptance of a particular theory or philosophy was not 

sirnply a matter of intellectual choice, but one of a

npassionate act of faith,r.131 Faith in the certainty of 

the revolution. His rrfollower.srr, particularly Tkachev and  

> Nechaev,

would expand on this notion of the dedicated 

revolutionary. 

chernyshevsky affected most of the revolutionaries 

in Russia in the mid-to-Iate 1800's. If one had not read 

him, chances are that a friend or an ideological opponent 

had. Lenin, was thus also indirectly exposed to 

Chernyshevsky. Other Russian revolutionaries who would have 

an effect on Lenin, were familiar with, and accepted some of 

the ideas of Chernyshevsky. These include Lenin's Marxist mentors, Plekhanov and Axelrod, and Lenin's Russian 

connection, Tkachev, and Nechaev. 

Lenin, while at University in Kazan, joined a

revolutionary circle headed by Lazar Bogoraz. This circle 

wanted to revive Narodnaya Volya. However, Lenin and the 

others were arrested and Lenin was exiled to his mother's 

estates in Kokushkino.lsz While in exile during the winter 

of 1887-88, Lenin poured through his father's library. 

There he found old issues of The Contemporary, 

Chernyshevsky's journal, including the issue with What is To 

rbid., 58. 

Theen, Lenin, 56-57.   

> 131
> 132 80
> Be Done?

in i9.133 Lenin had earlier read What is To Be  

> Done?,

but did not fully understand it, probably due to his 

young age and its complex language used to get around 

censorship. In 1904 Lenin said of the book to Valentinov, a

fellow revolutionary in Lenin's group, 

I declare that it is impermissible to call what is 

To Be Done crude and untalented. Hundreds of people  

> became

revolutionaries under its influence. could 

this have happened if chernyshevsky had been 

untalented and crude? My brother, for examPle' was 

captivated by him, and so was I. He completely 

trlnsforrned lny outlook. . This novel provides 

inspiration for a lifetirne: untalented books don't 

have such an influence.l34 

Following this staternent, Gusev, another revolutionary' 

asked of Lenin if , rrit was no accident that in L9O2 you 

called your parnphlet What is To Be Done?.tt Lenints reply was, rrls this so difficult to guesszrr.l35 Lenin hinself adnitted the following to Valentinov,   

> Chernyshevsky was

my favourite author  

> Chernyshevsky

introduced me to philosophical 

materialism. It was again Chernyshevsky who first   

> gave me

an indication of Hegel's role in the  

> development

of philosophical thought, and I got the concept of dialectical method from him; this made it  

> much

easier for me to master the dialectic of Marx 

Iater on. It is said that there are musicians 

with perfect pitch: one could say that there are 

also people with perfect revolut.ionary f1air. Marx 

and Chernyshevsky were such men. ''o 

rbid., 58-59. 

as quoted in Valentinov, Encounters With Lenin,  

> 63-64.
> Gusev.
> 133
> 134
> 135

lbid. , 64. also see Appendix rII for more on  

> 136

Lenin as quoted in Ibid., pp 66-67. 81 

This statement illustrates that chernyshevsky was not 

sinpty a novelist for Lenin. After he had written his 

pamphlet and entitled it what is To Be Done?, Lenin still held on to the ideas that he learned from Chernyshevsky' 

Lenin, like Chernyshevsky, soon came to judge all things by 

their relevance to the revolution. As Rolf Theen states, 

rrlf we can rely on the testimony of Krupskaya, it was to ttre works of Chernyshevksy that Lenin turned in his free  

> mornents

.t137 Lenin, did not only read Chernyshevsky but 

was influenced by his ideas. This can be illustrated by 

examining Lenin's and chernyshevsky's views on the 

Revolution, class, and the Party(revolutionaries) .       

> CHERNYSHEVSKY Al{D LENIN ON CLASS' PARTY, AND THE REVOLUTIONl3s

chernyshevsky did not hold the same views as Lenin 

did, but Lenin incorporated a great deal of Chernyshevsky's 

ideas into his own writings. Chernyshevskyts writings must 

be examined closely as many of them $/ere heavily censored. He often wrote in the Aesopian method, saying one thing 

which related to another. For examPle, Chernyshevsky would 

often talk about the problems of the Austrian Empire, but in  

> 137

Theen, @LlQ, 60.  

> 138

For Lenin's views on these topics in better detail see chapter two. 82 

truth was talking about the problems of the Russian Ernpire' 

This was particularly true with respect to his writings on 

politics and revolution, ds these were very sensitive areas 

for the authorities.l3e 

chernyshevsky lived in a different tine than did 

Lenin. The concern of the int,elligentsia was only just 

beginning to switch from reform to revolution. This could 

be considered the tine of the genesis of Russian radical revolutionism. His views on Class h/ere, thus, somewhat 

different in emphasis. However, though not particularly  

> concerned

with the working class, the proletariat, 

chernyshevsky held many of the views that Lenin, would 

absorb. Chernyshevsky emphasized the importance of class in 

almost all of his writings on philosophy and science. He 

outlined the connection between various idealist trends of a

particular time with the rnood of the bourgeoisie. After the 

revolutions in Europe in 1848 the bourgeoisie were terrified 

about revolution. This could be seen in the reactions of 

the bourgeoisie. Chernyshevsky wrote that, rrgrief over 

their impending fate creates confusion in their rnindsrr. For  

> Chernyshevsky

only a rrtoilerrr, 

thanks to his robust nature and to his stern 

experience of life . understands the essence of 

things much better, more correctly, and more deeply 

than people of the more fortunate classes.'"  

> 13e

woehrlin, chernvshevskii , 229.  

> 140

chernyshevsky, Selected Essays, 22. 83 

chernyshevsky believed that only the lower classes could emancipate society. For Chernyshevsky it was the toilers' the peasants, and labourers, rather than only the 

proletariat, who were the only truly tthistorical classrr, as 

with Lenin, as illustrated above in Chapter Two. The other 

classes, particularly the bourgeoisie, ot liberals, were too 

concerned with their own interests: rran individual class 

that sacrifices the [good of the] whole nation to its own 

interest comes to a bad end itself .tt1al For Chernyshevsky, 

and Lenin, the lower classes, the workers and the rrrural 

proletariatrr, ds Lenin refers to the najority of peasants, 

were the important people in Russian society. 

chernyshevsky, like Marx, placed economic activity 

and socioeconomic status as the primary factors of life. 

According to Chernyshevsky, aII differences between races 

and nations of the same race are historical. Conditions of 

life matter more. Classes are based on economic 

activity.la2 Chernyshevsky placed classes as the most 

important division in society. He wrote, 

a nation also has class and occupational divisions. . These specifically class or occupational 

features are so important that, except for language 

and patriotism, eaah class or occupational division in a- given West-European nation differs far more in 

mental and moral respects from the other divisions in that nation than it does from its corresponding 

division among the other West-European nations. As  

> 141 chernyshevsky

in Philosophyrr, ds taken  

> 142 chernyshevsky,

from the |tAnthropological Principle 

from Selected Essavs, L25. 

Selected Essavs, 27. 84 

regards mode of life and conceptions, the peasant 

class throughout the whole of wgstern-Europe appears 

to constitu€e a single entitY.la3 

Lenin could have obtained this conception of class from 

either Chernyshevsky or Marx as they both had similar views.  

> However, where Marx

dealt with the proletariat,  

> Chernyshevsky

deals primarily with the peasantry. 

Russia was not a very developed country in the 1860rs and the bulk of the population were peasants. The  

> emphasis

in Chernyshevsky's writings deal not so much with 

the working class as with the working classes, that is the peasants and labourers. As previously mentioned, Chernyshevsky did not trust in reform from above. For him, 

that only benefitted the few, either the nobility or the 

bourgeoisie.laa The masses would get nothing unless they would take it. The masses would have to take up arms 

against their oppressorsi rronly the axe can save uEr and 

nothing but the axe!tt145 Lenin would have to deal with 

this segrment of the population, sornething which he could not 

Iearn from Marx. He more closely followed Chernyshevsky as 

he deals with the rrrural proletariatrr. Lenin could not  

> 143

chernyshevsky, t'oD Scientific Conception of World 

Historyrr in Selected Works, 25O-25L.   

> taa p1111arn

F. Woehrlin, Chernvshevskii: The Man 

and The Journalist. (Canbridge: Harvard University Press, 

I97L',), 2OL.  

> 145

as quoted in Valentinov, Encounters with 

Lenin., 72. 85 

follow Marxts conception of class. He needed to account for the majority of the Russian population, the peasantry. Chernyshevsky, independently of Marx, also discussed 

the injustice of the market system. In What is To Be Done?, 

vera Pavlovna has a vision of a glorious utopia in her 

fourth dream. Chernyshevsky's message was that private 

ownership and the system of competition produces luxury only 

for a very few. The bulk of the masses remained in 

misery.la6 It was not very odd, then, that people of 

different classes had dj-fferent goals: rrlt has long been 

noted that different people in the same society regard as 

good, things that are quite different, and even 

oppositesrr.l4T For the same reasons, chernyshevsky 

believed that the classes could never work together. He 

attacked the Arnerican economist Carey, who advocated the  

> harmony

of class interests. Chernyshevsky pointed out that 

classes are not equal and that one will gain predominance 

over the others. He wrote, The fundamental unity [of the classes] breaks up in  

> numerous

directions, of which the one that is most 

favoured by historical circumstances gains   

> predominance_and pushes

the others into the   

> Lackgrout't6. 148
> 145

woehrlin, chernyshevskii, 2L8.  

> 147

chernyshevsky, rrAnthropological Principle in 

Philosophytt as taken from Selected Essays, L24.  

> 148

chernyshevsky, ds quoted in Selected Essays, 35-

> 36. 86

Chernyshevsky, and Lenin in following him, had a

distrust of the liberals and reform from above. But as 

mentioned earlier in this chapter, Chernyshevsky also 

believed that the lower classes could not by themselves do 

anything about their situation. The lower classes were 

concerned with econornic, rather than political, matters. 

Chernyshevsky stated that, 

There is no European country in which the vast 

majority of the people is not absolutely indifferent to the rights which are the ohject of desire and 

concern oiry to the liberars.la9 

Chernyshevsky believed that a few enlightened individuals 

could lead society towards socialism. These rrnew menrr would 

be totally dedicated to the cause of the social revolution. In this respect, Lenin followed Chernyshevsky quite closely.      

> CEERNYSHEVSKY AND IJENTN ON REVOIJUTIONARIES (THE PARTY)

As mentioned, Chernyshevsky wrote at a different, 

and less-developed tirne, than did Lenin. Chernyshevsky 

wrote in the late 1850's and early 1860ts. This was not a

period of time in Russian history which saw the rise of 

political parties, but rather it was a time for definitions of points of view. Several decades were to pass before 

there was to be any formation of organized political activity.l5o Chernyshevsky, thus, did not write so much  

> 1ae

chernyshevsky in 1859 as taken from Berlin, 

Russian Thinkers, 3.  

> 150

woehrlin, chernyshevskii, 228. 87 

about rrthe partyrr to brinq about the revolution, but more 

about the people who were to bring it about; the so called  

> rnew

menrr. In 1859, Chernyshevsky, in his rrPoliticsrl 

section of The Conternporary, defined reactionaries and 

reformers. He defined reactionaries as those who fought for their own material interests. Any change, economic or 

political, that would affect their well-being would be 

opposed. Reformers were those who wanted change not for their own benefit, but for the people's benefit. He further 

subdivided reformers into moderates, which he often referred 

to as liberals, and revolutionaries. Moderates wanted to  

> sway

the opinion of reactionaries, and thus the government, 

to their own progressive views. Revolutionaries were those  

> who

realized that rhetoric and justice would not change the 

reactionaries, and hence, the system- Therefore, the 

revolutionaries became uncompronisingly hostile to the 

regime. Chernyshevsky even went so far as to identify his  

> own

position as that of a revolutionary. He discredited the 

moderates and sarcastically referred to himself as a

reactionary.l5l Chernyshevsky considered himself a

revolutionary and could exert a considerable influence upon 

the rnany students which followed him. Many of these 

students would in turn becorne revolutionaries' particularly in Narodnaya volya. 152  

> 151

rbid. , 24o.  

> 152

rbid., 273-274 88 

Chernyshevsky's best outlined representation of a

revolutionary must be considered, Rakhmetov in What is To Be 

Done?. In this novel he alludes to the rrnew menrr in Russian 

society and how they will be necessary for the revolution.  

> He

says to the reader, you have only just begun to appear among us; already 

therets a fair number of you and its growing aII the 

tirne. If you were my.entire audience, theretd be no 

need for me to write.r)J  

> Chernyshevsky

here is alluding to the need to spread the word of revolution to others. His book is aimed at the 

enlightened rrnew menrr in Russian society. However,  

> Chernyshevsky

did not believe that just anyone could be a

revolutionary. OnIy a small percentage of the rrnew menrl 

would be revolutionaries, because for Chernyshevsky, the 

revolutionary must be totally dedicated to the cause, that is revolution.  

> Rakhmetov, was

just such a character. Chernyshevsky 

introduces the character of Rakhmetov into What is To Be  

> Done?

in order to provide his perception of what a

revolutionary should be. Rakhmetov is totally dedicated to 

the cause, giving up all vices, except cigars. He becomes 

celibate so as not to be distracted from his goa1s, and once 

slept on a bed of nails to harden himself. He learned 

gymnastics to increase his physical strength, which became 

Iegendary. In short, he dedicated his entire life to  

> 153

chernyshevsky from What is To Be Done?, 48-49. 89 

training for the revolution.l54 As Chernyshevsky states to the reader:  

> Nowadays

there are only a few people I1ke Rakhmetov.  

> Up

to Lhe present time I've met only eight examples 

of tnis breed. They had nothing in common 

except for one trait, but this trait united them 

into a sinqle breed and distinguished thern from aII  

> others.l55 Chernyshevsky

does not mention what this trait is, but it is not hard to determine that it is their dedication to the 

revolution. As Vera Pavlovna states,   

> The Rakhmetovs

are a different breed. They identify with the common cause to such an extent that it  

> becomes

their own necessity, filling their.-Iives. It 

even comes to replace their personal life.''o  

> What Chernyshevsky

is calling for is professional 

revolutionaries. Lenin's views on revolutionaries can be 

traced back to these very ideas: 

the struggle against the political police requires 

special qualities; it requires professional 

revolutionaries . the organisation of the 

revolutionaries must consist first and foremost of 

people who make revolutionary activity their profession . all distinctions as between workers 

and intellectuals, not to speak distinctions of 

trade and profession, in both categories, must be     

> ef faced. 157-
> 154

For more on Rakhmetov see chernyshevsky, What is 

To Be Done?, 27L-293, and 310-311.   

> 155 Chernyshevsky, What

is To Be Done?, 274.  

> 156

chernyshevsky, What is To Be Done? , 343.  

> 157

Lenin, What is To Be Done?, in Tucker, The Lenin 

Anthology, 66-68. also see note 4L in chapter two. 90 

Thus it becomes clear that Lenin, who held Chernyshevsky in 

such high esteem, incorporated some of his ideas, 6s 

illustrated in Chapter Two, oD revolutionaries.     

> CHER}IYSHEVSKY AIID I,ENIN ON TEE REVOI,UTION

Chernyshevsky believed that the revolution was only 

a matter of time. For hin the existing economic relations, the unequal distribution of wealth and po\^/er, were unjust and, as mentioned above, could only be solved by revolution. 

The people could only be emancipated, and thus achieve 

victory, through revolutionary struggle.l58 Chernyshevsky 

had a distrust for reforms from above, and he believed that liberals could be dangerous. He said the following about 

the reform attempts of M.M Speranskii: 

All such people are ridiculous with their alluring 

dreams, but they may be harmful when they delude 

themselves in serious matters. In their enthusiastic bustle on a false path, they seem to 

achieve some success, and with this lead many 

astray, who follow the same path which leads to 

nothing but illusions. From this point of view, 

the activity of Speranskii nay be called 

> harmful.15e

Chernyshevsky realized that the conflict between classes 

would lead to a revolutionary situation. He defined  

> 158

chernyshevsky,  

> 15e

chernyshevsky 

Chernvshevskii, 245-246. 

Selected Works, 5. 

as quoted in Woehrlin, 91 

radicalism, not as attachment to any particular political form, but as a belief in revolution as the only means of 

correcting the problems in society.lto  

> Chernyshevsky

is considered by some to be a

democrat. This question has already been addressed and 

disrnissed. However, he did not want to show that democratic 

political forms were unimportant, but that alone, they were 

inadequate. In a conversation with S.G. Stakhevich,  

> Chernyshevsky

said the following:  

> You

say, gentlemen, that political freedom cannot 

feed a hungry man. That is perfectly true. But 

really, can air, for example feed a man? Naturally 

not. Yet without food man can live for several 

days, without air he cannot last even ten minutes. 

Just as air is necessary for the life of an 

individual manr so political liberty .i.s necessary 

for the just life of a human society.'o' For Marx, the revolution was an historical event. 

on the other hand, Lenin believed that revolution should be  

> made,

and he was primarily concerned with Russia. Lenints 

rrvoluntarismrr can also be traced to Chernyshevsky.  

> Chernyshevsky

actively calls for the revolution. He 

believes in its inevitability, as does Lenin, but also ca1ls 

for irnrnediate action. When we first encounter Vera Pavlovna 

in What is To Be Done? she is singing a song with the 

following words:  

> We

are poor but we are working people; we have 

strong hands. We are uneducated, but not stupid, 

rbid., 232  

> Chernyshevsky

as quoted in fbid., 23L. 

> 160 161 92

and we long for light. We shall study-knowledge 

will set us free. We shall work-labour wiII enrich 

us. This will come to pass. If we live a little longer, w€ shall live to see 19.162 

This song obviously infers that the revolution will come and 

enrich the lot of the poor. At the end of Vera Pavlovna's 

fourth dream, Chernyshevsky, in Aesopian form, calls for the [nert menrr in society to work towards revolution.163 

Chernyshevsky also made a stronger call to revolution when on March 1st, 1860, under the signature of 

na RussidDtt, he wrote in Herzenrs Kolokol: 

Our situation is intolerable . only the axe can 

save us, and nothing but the axe! Change your tune 

and let your Kolokol [be11] not call to prayer, but 

let it sound the alarm! Surnmon Russia to take up the 

> axe.1&

Chernyshevsky,s ideas can directly be found in Lenin's 

writings. But perhaps the most important point about Chernyshevsky and revolution, is the fact that he 

popularized the thought of revolution, paving the way for 

Tkachev, Nechaev, and Lenin. 

> CONCIJUSTON

Lenin held many of the same views as Chernyshevsky. 

Both of them distrusted reform from above, and had a hatred 

for the libera1s. Lenin, following Chernyshevskyts 

teachings, came to judge everything by its relevance to the  

> 162

chernyshevsky, What Is To Be Done?, 42.  

> 163

rbid., 378-379.  

> 1&

as quoted in Valentinov, Encounters With Lenin, 

> 72. 93

cause of revorution. Few schorars dispute that Lenin read 

chernyshevsky before he had read Marx, and by his own words, 

it was from chernyshevsky that he first rearned the 

dialectic. This made it easier for hin to master Marx. 

chernyshevsky states the following passage, illustrating his 

primitive form of historical materialisrn: 

Literacy and education are increasing graduarry  

> among

the people, . because of thi; the people 

are coming to understand their own human worlhr-to distinguish favourable things and institutions from 

those unfavourabre to thern, and to think about their needs. How can this even be doubted? And if this indubitable historicar law brings some inconvenience 

to our routine, them, however one tries to avoid it, the course of history will not be stayed.165  

> However,

Alexander Kucherov brings out in his study 

of chernyshevsky that chernyshevsky never resorved his 

internal conflict between the rrhistorical process, and the 

rrfree choice of rational menr. chernyshevsky believed in the deterrninisrn of history, but at the same tirne, berieved 

that individual revorutionaries could make a difference. He 

vacillated on this point, particurarly with respect to the 

problem of changing the econornic system of society.16 Lenin arso suffered from a conflict between Marxian 

determinism and his own desire to make the revolution. 

chernyshevsky tried to educate the young generation 

in Russia, the so-calIed rnew menr as to their task in  

> 165

chernyshevsky as taken from Woehrlin, 

Chernyshevskii, 224.  

> 166

as taken from rbid. , 22s .94 

society. He taught them that the revolution would change 

the structure of society to help the downtrodden masses. He 

did not outline the form the revolution would take, but  

> made

clear that it would be made by a small group of 

revolutionariesi men such as Rakhmetov. Lenin, perhaps did 

the greatest honour to Chernyshevsky by naming his own 

panphlet of 1902, What is To Be Done?. Chernyshevskyts 

novel has the rrnew menrr for the collective hero. Lenin 

substitutes rrthe partyrr for the rrnew ment,.167 However, 

Chernyshevsky also af fected Lenin through his rrfollowers,t,  

> men

such as Tkachev and Nechaev. These populist revolutionaries, built on Chernyshevsky, particularly his 

conception of the rrnew menrr , ot party, and the nature of the 

revolutionaries. Valentinov best sums it up when he states 

that, It is thus irnpossible, unless one gives credence to a wanton misconception to believe that Lenin was 

shaped only by Marx and Marxism. By the tirne he  

> came

to Marxisrn, Lenin, under Chernyshevskyts 

influence, hras already forearmed with certain revolutionary ideas which provided the distinctive 

features-_of his specifically rrl,eninistr political   

> make-up. 168
> 167

Theen, Lenin, Lo7. 

lff valentinov, Encounters With Lenin, 65. 95 

rt was at this tirne [1823] that Tkachev asserted the views which Lenin was to expand later . Leninrs 

debt to Tkachev is indicated in the program of the 

latterts journal, Nabat . , whicl b6gan to appear in Geneva at the end of LBTS . Leninrs 

debt to Tkachev is a substantial one. rf Lenin was 

hesitant in acknowledging the debtr €rs he was also 

in the case of Nechayev, this c.n be explained in terms of anxiety to make the Bolsheviks appear to be 

the party of the masses-as contrasted with-

Nechayev's and Tkachevrs concept of the rninority 

conspiratorial party. Lenin wls not opposed to conspiracy-he recognized it as a necessary erement 

in -conbatting an autocracy-but he fert inpelled to mask it as the.rrVanguas4rr of the future. (John S. 

Reshetar, Congise History of the CpSU, in V,ieeks, The 

First Bolshevik, 73) The last chapter concluded that Lenin was indeed 

infruenced by chernyshevsky. Another source of Leni_n's 

thought can be found by examining the works of p.N. Tkachev.  

> Tkachev was

a Russian revolutionary who came to the 

forefront of the revolutionary movernent in the late 186ors 

and 1870's- Like many other young Russians he was greatly 

infruenced by the works of chernyshevsky. However, unrike 

chernyshevsky, he eventuarry fred Russia. Therefore, his 

views on revorution were much clearer due to the lack of 

censorship. Tkachev wrote on the nature of the revolution 

and the need for a srnarl enlightened minority, a party, to  

> make

the revorution. To this respect he contributed a great 

dear to Lenin's world outlook. Tkachev was arso one of the 

first Russian revolutionaries to be influenced by ltarx.15e 

However, Tkachev, unlike many of his contemporaries, was  

> opposed

to anarchy and rpopulisnr. Following in 

chernyshevskyts path Tkachev distrusted the masses, for he  

> was

a Jacobin and berieved in seizing, and using, state  

> power.
> 15e

Yarmolinsky, Road to Revolution, L46. 

> 96 97

The infruence that Tkachev had upon Lenin can be  

> gauged

by firstry examining Tkachev's own views and his rore 

in the revorutionary movernent. Forrowing that a comparison  

> between

Lenin's views on the party, Class, and the 

Revorution, as outlined in chapter Two, and Tkachevrs view 

on the same subject will gauge the commonalities between 

them. Lastly, the conclusion wiII surnmarize the 

sinilarities that they have and attenpt to irrustrate that they are more than just coincidence.    

> TKACHEV: AN INTRODUCTION
> Tkachev was

a bright, young student in st. petersburg 

in the 1860's. However, rike many of his contemporaries he 

soon turned towards radicalism. chernyshevsky and his 

journal, The Contemporary, gave Tkachev his first inspiration. He entered st petersburg university in 1861 

where he got his first contact with the realities of 

politics. By october of that same year he was in prison in 

Kronstadt fortress for his participation in the student demonstrations in the farr of 1861.170 when Tkachev was 

released frorn prison his forrnal education had come to an 

end as he, like many others, were experred. He had been 

arlowed to take his final examination for adnission into raw  

> 170

Franco Venturi, 

Centurv Russia. (New york: Grosset and Dunlap, J.966), 390. 98 

schoor and had passed. However, his iIlega1 agitational activity did not alrow him the tine to attend school full-time. This combined with the government's policy of intorerance towards student agitation, the revolutionary 

spirit of the times, and Tkachevrs own fiery and restless  

> ternperament

red Tkachev to abandon his studies in order to 

pursue the career of a fulI-tirne revolutionary writer.171 Tkachev originarry wrote in 1egal journars and was 

not overly concerned with theories of revolution, but more 

with matters of jurisprudence. The idea which most 

attracted Tkachev was the importance of econornics. He came 

to link sociar change with changes in the underlying  

> econornic

structure. He soon rearized that there was a need 

for politicar and economic restructuring. Tkachev 

invariably deveroped such ideas, which red hin to the 

revolutionary path, through the influence of  

> Chernyshevsky. 172

chernyshevsky greatry affected the outlook of 

Tkachev, as welr as numerous other revorutionaries of the 

l-860's and 1870's. weeks outrines in his book, The First 

Bolshevik, the substance of Chernyshevsky's heritage to the 

revolutionaries: 1) suggestions of economic determinism, 2,)  

> The

utopian-socialist outlook of what is To Be Done?, 3) The  

> 171

weeks, The First Bolshevik, 42-43.    

> 172 Deborah
> ilacobin .

, (Seattle: 

> 4L.

H3r{v, 

University of Wasnington eress, Le77), 99 

fear (in chernyshevsky's younger days) of the destructive 

potentiar of the masses if left unleashed in a spontaneous 

revolution, 4) Russia as a special case, and 5) The 

typicalry Russian dedication to the cause.lE Much of this 

can be seen in Tkachevrs own writings.  

> Tkachev

believed that economic forces !/ere extremely 

important. He followed a loose form of economic materialisrn 

but he was more interested in the ilgreat practical 

importance of economic materialisrn than in dealing with 

theoretical changes to it. t He noted that economic 

materialism was able, 

to concentrate the energy and activities of those 

sincerely devoted to the social cause on really 

essentiar points: the vitat interests of the peopre. 

rt was a spur that inspired thern the support of the most indispensable forces. . rt was a spur that inspired direct practical action.lTa Tkachev was concerned with the econornic and sociar well-

being of the peopre. The above quote ill-ustrates Tkachev's 

desire to bring about the revorution. unlike many of his populist conternporaries Tkachev believed in direct political action. He did not believe that one should simply forrow 

the rrgeneral lahrsrr. He believed that general- laws could be 

applied to nature but not so much to society. rn 1865 he 

wrote:   

> 16 Weeks, The

First Bolshevik , 22-23.  

> 174

Tkachev r dS quoted in VenturJ-, Roots of 

Revolution, 398. 100 

one can take up an objective, indifferent attitude towards the phenomena of nature. But with the phenomena of social 1ife, one must take up a

critical attitude. The phenomena of nature can be 

reduced to general rules and more or less certain rawsi but the phenomena of contemporary rife, sociar phenomena, cannot and must not be reduled to raws; 

doing lnl= implies justifying a number of ausuiaities wirich are transformed- into piinciptes thanks to habit and indifference.tD  

> Tkachev

understood that, there was rittle chance for 

reforrn in the Tsarist system. He also understood, unlike  

> many

of his contemporaries, of the impossibility for any 

rear reform in the capitalist system of production. He 

wrote: 

The entire problem of economic reforn can be sorved by a government decree granting credit to the workers- we have not the srigfrtest doubt that such a decree, if it were rearly cirried out, ,".ria read to the desired resurt. we do not doubt that the state has all the means it needs of cornpelling  

> agreement

with its own laws if onry it ilant to, and 

that it is il u position-if it so desires-to open up the purses of the capitalists to the workmen. But wirr it so desire? rnat is the entire p;;i";, and 

there can be no doubt about the answer. . Only 

in one case can the state act for the benefit of the workman, and that is when the workers themserves  

> become

the dorninating class in the poriticar sphere; when the state of weitern Europe, the state of the bourgeoisie, becomes the state-of the work"r=lrzd----

rn these notes Tkachevrs view of the state becomes crear.   

> Tkachev was opposed

to the anarchists in that he did not want to abolish the state, but rather, wanted to use the   

> 1D Tkachev

as quoted in lbid., 3g2.   

> 176 Tkachev

in the notes on the text of his translation of Ernst Becher, Thg probrem of the workers in it=, "g.!"*ooriry,tiorifi".!"g *F@..= ao ,orr" ,a. r €rs quoted in venturi, Roots@401. 101 

state for the benefit of the people. He did berieve in a

future socialist society, but in order to bring that about, one needed to use the state, not smash it. Tkachevrs view 

on propaganda was that it would only work to educate the  

> masses

once the rrrevolutionary party had seized political  

> Pohrer.n177
> He

also held an opposing view to the anarchists on 

the natter of the rore of the masses. Here, Tkachev again drew on the infruence he received from chernyshevksy. Tkachev wrote that: the average representative of the people is a

dispassionate person; this is parti""i"rry-tiue ot the Russian.people. srave-rikl :.rpui="--i.";; been encouraged in the Russians by centuries, o1d 

slavery. Secretiveness, untiustworthin"==r-

servility . have ali served to atropty'tt" energy of the Russian people. They u."'pirl"gmatic by nature. rt is impolsil'e to ptice ""v tt"i" in their enthusiasm. rheir stoicar__passivitv is rike the encrusted shell of a sn6i1.1z8' ----r  

> Tkachev

did not berieve that the masses courd do anything on 

their own. He came to the conclusion that the revolution 

must be made irnrnediately. otherwise the revolution courd be 

delayed under the auspices of the bourgeoisie. For Tkachev, 

the revolution must be made by a srnarr minority of dedicated 

revorutionaries. rn an article pubrished in 1868, entitled  

> rrMen

of the Future and Heroes of the Bourgeoisier, Tkachev 

1z Tkachev, in vladimir c- Nahirny, The Russian 

. (New Brunswick: Transaction Books, L983))t}z.   

> 178 Tkachev

from rour rrrusions, in his journar, Nabat, as taken from weeks, rhe rirsi eolshevikl "ri: LO2 

outlined his conception of the rrrealistrrr the ideal man, the 

revolutionary. They were to be inspired by one singre 

ideal, making the revolution: Their distinctive badge ries in the fact that alr their activity, their whore way of rife is doninated 

by one ambition, one passionate idea: to make the 

rnajority 9f m9n happy and to invite as many as 

possibre to the banquet of tife. The rrinfing about 

of this idea becomes the only purpose of tieir activity, because this idea is- coirpretery fused into their_ conception of. personar happiiess.'nveiyttring is subordinated to this idea, eirErything =a"ririced-if one can even use the word'sacriii"i.fr, 

For Tkachev, these idear peopre would not be united in a

roose form- He outrined the need for a strong organization 

for the minority. He was not denocratic. He berieved that, this minority, because of its higher mentar and 

morar_development, always has and ought to have 

intelr-ectuar an politich power over the najority. . 

> we acknowledge

anarchy . but onlv is the desirable ideal of the far distant futu."'rao-

This gives a brief overview of Tkachev's thought. He has 

often been referred to as a Jacobinl8l, and this can hardry 

be disputed. He was a sociarist who believed that the onry  

> way

to bring about change was for a minority to seize the 

state and use it to bring about revolution.   

> TKACHEV'S REVOIJUTTONARY PAST
> 17e Tkachev,

Revolution, 4O8. 

People, 243. 

> 181

as quoted in Venturi, Roots of  

> 180

Tkachev, as quoted in UIam, fn the Name of the  

> See

Hardy, The Critic as a Jacobin. 103 

Tkachev, through the 1860's, became more radical as 

he clashed more and more with the Tsarist regime. fn 1856 

he was caught in the crackdown by the secret police after 

Karakazovrsl82 attempt on the Tsar's 1ife. However, 

Karakazov had acted alone and Tkachev was Soon released for Iack of any real evidence. During this period Tkachev kept 

in touch with the Academy of Srnorgon, part of the University 

of St. Petersburg and one of the few centers of 

revolutionary activity which remained active during the 

nwhite terror,t.183 There was more student unrest in 1869. 

During these student disorders, Tkachev issued a small 

manifesto entitled, rrTo Societytt184, which was an attempt 

to make the student demands more widely known. He was 

giving a political stance to the student disorders. During this same year, before the disorders actually 

occurred, Tkachev had met a brilliant young activist by the  

> name

of Sergei Nechaev. Nechaev hras a true revolutionary' giving everything to the cause. He and Tkachev shared 

similar Jacobin views. Tkachev wrote about them, Nechaev 

Iived them.185 Together the two of them tried to found a

> 182
> 183
> 1&

contested 

alone who 

> 185

see Appendix III for more on Karakazov 

Venturi, Roots of Revolution' 390-391 

The authorship of rrTo societytt has sornetimes been 

but most scholars believe that it was Tkachev 

wrote it though Nechaev may have had some input. 

for more on Nechaev, see the following chapter. L04 

conspiratoriar movement based on these disturbances.l&  

> Adam

ulam berieves that Tkachev can be considered a mentor 

of Nechaev, for by 1868, Tkachev already had a rich revolutionary past.187 Their association did not last too 

long as Nechaev soon fred the country while Tkachev was 

arrested again on March 26th, 1869. He had to wait, in prison until the 15th of July 1871 before being tried in the 

triar of Nechaev's followers. Nechaev had concocted a myth 

about him leading a very large revolutionary group in Russia. rn rearity this group was very smaIl but no one  

> knew

that as the cerrs consisted of onry five peopre and 

onry Nechaev went between them. rn short, Nechaev and a few 

of his followers murdered another, rvanov, who wanted to 

leave the group. For Nechaev, rvanovrs independence showed 

a lack of dedication to the revorution and, therefore, he 

had to die. The murder of rvanov wourd also bind the smaLr 

group together. A unity in crime. rn the subsequent 

investigations Nechaevrs groups were uncovered and Tkachev 

was irnplicated for revoLutionary activity. on the 13th of August, L87 L Tkachev was sentenced to g months in prison 

rrfor having repudiated the principle of property with the aim of destroying it or weakening its foundations.rrls 

ts Venturi, Roots of Revolution, 39r_.   

> L77 .
> 187

Ulam, rn the Name of A people,  

> 188

guote from Tkachevrs sentence as taken from 

Venturi, Roots of Revolution, 4OO. L05 

This was for his transration, or more correctly for his 

notes in the transration, of Becherrs work. He was arso 

sentenced to one year and four months in prison and exile to the district of verikiye Luki for his involvement with Nechaev. From there he fred abroad in December of 1g73.i8e   

> Tkachev seemed

to be a successor for the leadership 

of the Russian Revorutionary Movement in the 187ors. 

However, Tkachev made it crear that he had littre use for  

> democracy

and no use for rthe peoprer. He berieved that 

onry a rninority of revolutionaries courd change society 

towards the path of sociarism.leo Tkachev wourd better 

elaborate his views once free of the Russian censor. His 

views were rnade crearest in the journal he edited in ceneva, 

entitled, Nabat or The Tocsin. what this translates to is the Alarn 8e11. For Tkachev, the revol-ution had to be made 

novr- He believed that cooperatives and associations, such 

as woments cooperatives, wourd only help a select few. what    

> was needed was

active attacks against the structure of 

society. Here Tkachev echoed, though much more strongly, 

the theme of chernyshevskyrs what is To Be Done?. Tkachevrs 

Nabat stated the following: 

To organize for the purpose of disorganization and 

annihiration of the existing regime is the most  

> imrnediate and

most essentiar goir: this should be at  

> 18e

rbid. , 391 leo Ulam, rn the Na me of A People, 243. 106 

present the only.frogram of action of all revolutionaries. ''l  

> Tkachev

clearly called for methods which were not democratic and not explicitly Marxist. However, Tkachev was the first to write favourably of Marx in the Russian press and later 

entered into a polemic with Engels. 

While Tkachev was in prison awaiting trial he began 

to read Marx. His earliest references to Marx come in 1870, 

as Tkachev read Das KapitaT in the original German before it  

> was

translated into Russian in L872. Tkachev used Marx in his critical evaluation of capital as a an evil social and  

> economic system.192 Tkachev

concluded frorn his readings of 

Marx that capitalism was not a step towards progress but a

regressive step. Where Tkachev broke with Marx was that he  

> was

firrnly a statist. He did not want to destroy the state, 

but use ig.1e3 In this way, Russia would be able to rrskiprl 

capitalism and proceeds toward socialism. He did not 

believe that one could skip a stage in the progression of 

history, but that one could pursue a different course to the 

outcome, that is, socialism. In other words, to get to point s frorn point a one normally will travel through point 

b. However, for Tkachev c could not be achieved by skipping  

> 1e1

Tkachev, as quoted in U1am, 

People., 25L. In the Name of a 

> lez

Hardy, ,1e3 Hardy, The Critic as a Jacobin, 

> 157-158 161. LO7

b but it could be reached by an artogether different path, 

point d. He wrote that, 

Any given econornic principre deverops by the laws of 

its logic and to change these rules is just as 

irnpossible as it is to change the laws of human 

thought, the laws of our psychological and 

physiologicar functions. - rn tue irea of logicar 

reasoning it is irnpossible to skip from the first prernise to the last without tne rniaare-exactly as in the sphere of the developnent of a given economic 

principle, it is inpossibre to junp from the rower 

stage directly to the higher wilnout [passing throughl all intervening ones. . -ft is i totally different thing if [one], setting aside the 

old principre, will strive to eichange it for a new. 

This striving can very easily be croined with 

success, and in his action there wirl certainly be 

nothing utopian.le4 Tkachev and Engers entered into a poremic in 1875 in 

which Tkachev stated the peculiarity of Russiars situation.  

> Tkachev

wrote that Marxism courd not be appried to 

Russia.le5 Engels considered Tkachev ideas crude and 

prinitive. He accused Tkachev of ignorance of the probrems 

of the rnternational. Tkachev in turn said that Engels did 

not understand the situation in Russia. He wrote that, 

rf we have no urban proretariat, neither do we have 

a bourgeoisie. Between the oppressed people and the 

state which crushes it with its despotisml there is no rniddle class; our workers are faLea oniy with a

struggle against political power.le6  

> 1e4

Tkachev, as quoted in Hardy, The Critic as a

Jacobin, 9L.  

> 1e5

Berdyaev, The Russian fdea, 1l-g.   

> 1e6 Tkachev

as quoted in venturi, Roots of Revolution, 4L5-4L6. 108  

> Tkachev

developed his views throughout LB74 and 1875 until 

he could find a journar for his views. rn LB7s, together 

with some polish emigres, he founded Nabat.  

> Tkachev

used Nabat as an organ for disseninating his ideas to the Russian Revorutionaries. He knew the 

circulation was srnalr but that was not a probrem as it was 

not meant for the 'peop1er, but only for the dedicated 

revorutionaries. rn the journar he ca11ed for revorutionaries to delay no further and make the revolution. 

Here is an extract: 

The time has come to sound the tocsin! Look! The fire of reconomic progress, has already tou-hed the foundations of the- liie or oui-peopre.under its influence the old forms of our Lonmunar way of rife are already crumbling, the very "principi"'oi trr" obshchinarr, a principle whicn is supposed to be a

cornerstone of the future social structure we arr dream of, is.being_destroyed. Each day brings us new enemies and creates new social ractois which are inimical to us. . you see, the state, despairing of controlling.us, is calling- bourgeois society, the interrisentiia,' t;-ii;-;ie:tfi--'  

> Tkachev

stressed the urgency of the revolution. He was 

afraid that if nothinq was done, then the state would become 

a bourgeois state. This could postpone the revolution for a

long time. For hirn the time to strike was irnrnediatery as 

the Tsarist regime was rweakrr. Tkachev wrote the forrowing 

in Nabat: Today our enemies are weak and divided. only the government with its officials and sordiers slanas  

> 1e7

Tkachev, as taken from w.J.  

> D.-C.

Offord, translators and editors, of Russian Thought. (Ann Arbor: ardis, 

Leatherbarrow and 

A Documentarv Hi_storv  

> L987)

, 288-289. 109 

against us. But these officials and sordiers are no more than soulless.autornata, senseless, blind and often unconscious instruments in the hands of a few autocrats. . Consequently, the only stiong and dangerous enemy we. face today is this iir=ig"ificant handful of autocrats. . The revolutioiary does not prepare revolution; he frmakes, it. so make it! Make it soon.!-_ A11 vaciiration, alr procrastination 

is criminal | 1e8  

> Tkachev

constantry reiterated his urgency about the naking 

of the revotution. However, many other revorutionaries also 

carled for an irnmediate revolution, including the anarchists 

and populists. Tkachev, as a Jacobin, stood apart frorn thern 

in his calling for the seizure, and use, of the state: 

in modern soci-eties in generar, and in Russia in particular, material stiength i= "onc"ntrated in the hands of the state power, conseguently a true revorution-the actuir meiamorph6sis "i r"i"i-strength into material strength-can be effected onry if one condition obtains: if-revolutionaries seize state.pohrer into their own handsl in "lrr"r woras the irnmediate, direct airn of tne ievorution must be nothing other than. !h. capture of governrneniar power and the transformation of the glven conservative state into a revolutionary one-1ee 

Almost arr of the material which Tkachev wrote for Nabat was 

delivered in this very critical manner.  

> Tkachev

wrote in the Nabat for a coupre of years but 

soon lost interest in the Tocsin, partly due to his isolation from the rest of the Russian ernigre community.zoo 

rn 1882 he was comrnitted to an asylum where he died in rbid. , 289-290. 

rbid, 29L. 

Hardy, The Critic as a Jacobin, 296.  

> 199 110
> 1886.201 However,

Tkachev's life greatly affected many 

revolutionaries, among thern Lenin. N. Berdyaev, a

contemporary of Lenints who became a Russian rrliberalrr, 

believes that Tkachev nust be regarded as a predecessor of 

Lenin. He points out that Tkachev was hostile to 

anarchy(democracy), his view of revolution was an act of 

violence by a minority upon the majority, he was opposed to  

> propaganda

before the revolution, and tranted to avoid 

alrowing the state to become a bourgeois constitutionar 

state.202 A11 of this can be said of Lenin, who was very 

faniliar with the works of Tkachev. 

Other contemporaries of Lenin hold similar views. 

Varentinov, who was associated with Lenin in Geneva, recalrs 

Lenin terling hirn that rrTkachev was a great revolutionary 

for his time, a real Jacobin.rr203 pavel Axelrod, a founder 

of Russian Marxism, and later an opponent of Leninrs, wrote 

after the revorution that, rrdoesn't Tkachevrs rrrevorutionary 

minority[ remind one of the Bolsheviks, rrcarriers of 

revorutionary consciousnessrr opposed to the masses as the  

> 201

rbid., 3oo-301.  

> 202

Berdyaev, The Russian fdea, 11g. Berdyaev hras 

once a Marxist himself, but took the path of Struve and 

others by stressing the j-mportance of ideas such as 

spontaneity and allying with other classes, particurarry, the liberals in Russian society. He himself eventualry  

> became

a supporter of Russian liberalisn.  

> 203

Lenin in Valentinov, Encounters with Lenin, 203. 111 

carriers of spontaneityrr . zoc Lenin hirnself also qave 

credit to Tkachevts revolutionary ideas. He wrote that rrthe 

attempt to seize power after the ground for the atternpt had 

been prepared by the teaching of Tkachev and carried out by means of the |tterrifyingt, terror which realIy did terrify, 

was majestic.tt2o5 

Lenin did read Tkachev and he recommended it to others. How rnuch Lenin was influenced by Tkachev is hard to 

say. Lenints ideas are from a number of sources. However, 

a good way of gauging it is to examine the sirnilarities in their writings. A close exarnination of Tkachev on the 

issues of the Class, the Party, and the Revolution, should 

illustrate the debt that Lenin owes to Tkachev.      

> TKACIIEV ON CIrASS, THE pARTy, AND THE REVOLUTION

Tkachev, influenced by Chernyshevsky, did not trust the revolution to the masses. Lenints views on class can be 

found in greater detait in Chapter Two, but in summary, he 

believed that the masses could never develop revolutionary 

consciousness on their own. Lenin did not get such an 

interpretation from Marx, but predorninately from Chernyshevsky and Tkachev. A key concept in Tkachev's  

> 204

Axelrod as quoted in Haimson, The Russian 

Marxists, 36   

> 205 From

Lenj-n, Selected Works, ds taken from James 

H. Billington, Mikhailovskv and Russian populism. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1958), L96. LL2 

thought is the relationship between the masses and the 

revolutionaries. Tkachev did not berieve that the masses 

were capable of changing their situation and thus had a

profound distrust of the masses. He characterized the  

> masses

as having: 

psychol0gicar poverty . monotonous character 

- morar irnmaturity . a man of the masses is above arr erse an egotist. The course of his egotism may be found not only in his interr-ct, in his stupidity or immaturity, but in his material poverty. . Although he may feel a conmon 

interest and solidarity with his brothers, nevertheless he refuses to stick up for his comrades. Knowing that this might-threaten hirn with a loss of work or his piece of bread. . The 

resurt is that the general interest wilr always be 

lost sight of, whire each behaves strictly a-iorainq to his own interests, each scrapes onry f6r hirns"ri, and each loses out in the end.zG  

> Tkachev was

not democratic. He had no use for the masses 

as a revolutionary force on their own.  

> However, Tkachev

did not despise the masses, onry 

what they were capable of. Like many other revolutionaries 

he believed that he knew what was right for the masses. He 

arso believed that the social crasses which existed were not 

natural. He wrote that, history confronts us with the fact of the unequar 

distribution of wearth and so on. these are'ra"ts which pertain only to a certain type of sociar orqanization. outside the given systern there is no 

basis for their existencei tney are mere products of  

> 206

Tkachev, echoing the ideas 

Pisarev, in rrDestroyed Illirsionsr as 

First Bolshevik, 75. 

of Chernyshevsky and 

quoted in Weeks, The 113 

a given social system, not products of universar rerations of man qua univerlal hunin-;"il;'io-t-_-- 

> Tkachev

believed that the crasses of society were 

artificial. However, unlike Marx, he did not believe that the masses, the working classes, could do anything on their  

> own

to alleviate the probrem. Tkachev distrusted 

spontaneity. He infused this distrust of the spontaneity of 

the masses into Lenin. Lenin, as developed in chapter Two, 

did not berieve the revolution should be reft to the 

spontaneity of the masses. 

Lenin agrees closely with Marx on the issues of the importance of the proretariat as a revolutionary class and 

the importance of consciousness, but disagrees on how 

consciousness will develop.208 Lenin, infruenced by 

chernyshevsky and Tkachev, did not berieve that the masses 

courd develop anything other than rtrade-union consciousnessrr. Lenin postulated that class consciousness 

would have to be brought to the workers. He wrote that, 

crass poriticar consciousness can be brought to the workers only from without, that is, ";it-;;;r' outside the economic struggle, from outside the sphere of qelations betweei workers and ernployers.2o9  

> 207

Tkachev, as quoted in weeks, The First Borshevik, 8L.  

> 208

see chapter Two for further analysis.  

> 20e

Lenin, -what is tg Be Dqne, in Tucker, The Lenin Anthology, 50. Also sffibnupt", two. LL4 

Lenin conceived that this outside source would be the  

> Communist

Party. Tkachev held views which were much the       

> same.
> TKACEEV ON TEE PARTY A}TD TEE REVOLUTIONARY

Tkachev,s views on the role and composition of the 

revolutionary party are quite clearly explained in his writings. Tkachev postulated that the revolutionary partyrs 

main goal would be to seize state power and use it to 

further the sociar revolution. Tkachev berieved that only a

minority of dedicated revolutionaries could accornplish this task. He wrote that: 

The success of revolution depends on the formation 

and organized unity of the scattered revolutionary 

elements into a living body which is able to act according to a single, conmon plan and be 

subordinated to a single, conmon leadership-an 

organization based on centralization of power and 

decentralization of function.210 

For Tkachev, the party was not to be democratic and loose, 

but centralized and tightly organized. These same ideas  

> come

out in Lenin, who pointed out that the prirnary task of 

the party is to rrestablish an organisation of 

revolutionaries capable of lending energy, stability, and 

continuity to the political struggls.rr2ll  

> 210

Tkachev, in Weeks, The First Bolshevik, 96.  

> 211

Lenin, What it To Be Done?, , 63. AIso see note 39 

in Chapter Two. 115 

The organization which they create, the party, must have an 

iron discipline: If organization is necessary for any large or 

strong party, it is without any question even more 

necessary for a weak or small party, for a party 

which is only at the beginning of its formation.  

> Such

is the position of our social revolutionary 

party. For it, the problem of unity and 

organization is a matter of life and deat6.212  

> Tkachev

also realized that there must be a

relatively snall number of revolutionaries, and that they must be professional revolutionaries. He was a Jacobin and 

believed that the minority could, and, should, Iead the 

rnajority before, and during the revolution. Tkachev berieved 

that the minority, will irnpart a considered and rational form to the 

struggle, leading it towards predetermined goals, 

directing this coarse material element [the masses] 

towards ideal principles. In a real revolution the people act like a tempestuous natural force, destroying and ruining everything in its path, 

always acting without calculation, without  

> consciousness. Tkachev

continues along the same line of thought by writing that, 

A revolutionary rninority is no longer willing to wait but must take upon itself_ the forcing of 

consciousness upon the peop1..213  

> Tkachev

released his own rrrevolutj-onary catechismrl 

before the more farnous one released by Nechaev. rn it he  

> 212

Tkachev, as quoted in weeks,  

> 213

Tkachev, as quoted in Weeks, 

The First Bolshevik, 

a5-87.  

> 77.

The First Bolshevik, L16 

outrines the duties, role, and attitude of the professional 

revolutionary. Here are some excerpts:  

> He

is no revolutionary if he pities anything in this society. rt is even worse for hin if he has 

any kindred, intinater or amorous rerationships. .

. so- much joy and grief are in their memoriesr so  

> many

lopes.and pransr so many other thoughts and 

considerations that to renounce the ideai in the 

slightest would mean suicide-this idea1, which is so clos-e1y bound into their whole internal 

> being.2la

Lenin also called for professionar revorutionaries, 

regardress of whether they v/ere proletariat or nog.215 

However, Lenin did not carr for such an expricit break with 

fanily and society.  

> Tkachev

had many ideas which Lenin incorporated into his thought. For example, Tkachev also stressed that the 

party must have a dual nature, rron the one hand, it must 

prepare the seizure of power at the top, on the other the 

popular uprising at the lefgs'nrr.216 For Tkachev, the 

party, composed of professionar revorutionaries, had to seize power and make the revolution. For Tkachev, there 

should be no delay: 

Therefore, on the banner of the revolutionary party, a party of action rather than a party of rea-soiringl'  

> may

be inscribed only the folrowing iuords: struggle 

against the government, struggle alainst the  

> 214

Tkachev, as quoted in fbid., g7-gg.  

> 215

see chapter two for more on Leninrs views.  

> 216

Tkachev, from Nabat, as quoted in Leatherbarrow and Offord, -,- 2g3. LL7 

existing order- of_things, struggre to the r-ast drop of blood -to the last breath .217' TKACEEV ON TEE REVOIJUTION 

Tkachev, as previously mentioned, urged the irnnediate making of the revolution. He pointed out that 

capitarism lras on the rise in Russia and encroaching on the 

village conmune. The village commune was beginning to 

crumble and it wourd be harder to make revolution under a

bourgeois democracy. He believed that, this is . why we insist that a revor-ution in Russia is realry. indispensabre, and indispensable rigtrt at the present time. we wirr not stani tor u"y-1i""" for any temporization. rt is now or very fir- in the future, maybe never! Now conditio"= ii. iol-ii=; in ten, twenty, years they wirl u" "giin=l-!=lz-ri  

> Tkachev was

very much a voluntarist. He did not believe 

that the revolution would sirnply happen but that it wourd 

have to be rnade, and as soon as possible. He berieved that 

the revolutionaries did not need to prepare for the 

revolution as, The preparation of a revolution is not the work of revorutionaries. That is the work of expioii"r=, capitalists, landowners, priests, ^po1ice, officials, conservatives, liberars, progressi;e;;-"ia-li" rike. Revolutionaries do not pr-epaie, they make a

revolution. 

rn this way Tkachev, believed that Russia cour-d bypass the 

capitalist stage of developrnentr or ,,skip,, a stage. He   

> 217 Tkachev

as quoted in Haimson, The Russian Marxists, L7.  

> ?18

Tkachev, taken from rbid., 16. L18  

> answered

chernyshevsky's question, and just as easily could have been answering Lenin, when he wrote: As to the question, 'what is To Be Done?rr ret us not preoccupy ourselves with that any I0nger. rhat has been settred 10ng ago. Make the revolution. How?    

> However you may, however

you are able to . no attention should be given those questions which have no direct connection with practidar revoiuiio'ury action or which are concerned nainiy-wid-6; future-questions onry to further aiiisions-i"a disunity within the iircres oi-our revolutionary youth. r have in nind here those questions 

concerning the construction of a sociar order in the future and the practicar measures for brinqing it about once the revolution has cornpleted it; destructive mission. --!'or now, thl present-must occupy our attention.2le 

This lengthy quote irlustrates Tkachev's ideas on what the 

party should do toward the revolution. For him, it must make the revolution. Theoreticar matters about the future  

> system

should wait until after the revorution. For a

student of Lenin, this should sound farniliar. Lenin argued 

that what was irnportant was to create a unified social- 

> Democratic

party. Differences could be ironed out rater. 

unfortunatery for many Russian soci-alists, they berieved 

just such an idea.  

> The

revorution for Tkachev was not an historicar 

event so much as it was an act of a rninority party of 

revolutionaries. Tkachev did not see the party acting 

alone, but using the masses as their tools:  

> The

relationship of the revolutionary minority the people and Lhe participation of the ratter to in 8g_89 Tkachev, as quoted in Weeks, The First Bolshevik, 119 

revolutign. Tay be described in the foll0winq terms. rhe revorutionarv minoriiv,- ir""i;g-;;;";";;1" from the oppressive tLrror and iear ot i.tre "oii"ilporary rulers, opens the way for the people to apply their destructive revoluti6narv i"r"L. Rerying on this force, the revorutionarv'ri"".ity abry directs this violence for the destruiti""-oi ttr. irnmediate enernies of the revolution . . -:  

> Tkachev

arso stressed the importance that any seizure of  

> power

nust be accompanied by popular unrest. He contj_nues 

by writing that, 

an attack at the center of power and seizure of power in revorutionary han&s without at the same time.:_p?!"r3r uprisii,q ;";id ieaa to positive, lasting resqlts only uid"r-in"-ro=t favourable of conditions.22o  

> Democracy

and uni-versal suffrage meant nothing to Tkachev. He berieved that onry a revorution could change 

the existing conditions of the lower classesl rfeconomic 

slaves must remain political slavesr. Tkachev wrote that, 

universar tabulation of votes, which is attained by the workers as u rljollty i"-tn" state, proves always to be mere fictioir i -ru"iu=tic right and fron this right flow benefits t" irr"=" whose interests have nothing to do with tn"""--"i f orce ".r, gir" rneining to right.t.rth" workers. only Thus, Tkachev believed that the revolution was being 

prepared for by economics, but that it must be rnade by the 

part of dedicated revolutionaries.  

> 220

Tkachev, as  

> 221

Tkachev, as 

quoted in Weeks, The First Bolshevik, quoted in fbid., 9!-g2. 

> 77-78. L20 coNcLUSroN

Tkachev clearly held the ideas which Lenin wourd 

later use in his own writings. Tkachev made it clear that for him, the state must not be destroyed but used until 

every enemy has been destroyed. As Berlin puts it, ,rj-n this doctrine he was forr.owed by Lenin more faithfurry than mere 

adherence to the arnbivarent Marxist formula about the 

dictatorship of the proretariat seemed to reguipg. 1222 

Rorf Theen refers to Tkachev as the most important 

theoretician of Russian Jacobinism. He points out that both 

Lenin and Tkachev had an urgency in their writings. The 

revolution must be made no$/. As well as that, Theen agrees 

that Lenin's idea for the organization of the party was 

virtually the same as Tkachev's. According to Theen, Lenin 

was the uncontested heir to Tkach ev.zzs 

Leninr ds well as Tkachev, had to work in a

different situation than where Marxism developed. The 

bourgeoisie was not the prinary threat or foe in Russia. 

For them, the primary foe was the Tsarist autocracy. The 

revolutionary novement in Russia was much more constrained 

than ersewhere. The center of this revor-utionary rnovement 

was not the free labour movement, €ls it was in Germany, but 

Berlin, Russian Thinkers, 2I6_2L7 

Theen, Lenin, l-09-110. 

> 222 223 T2L

the intetrigentsia.22a under similar circumstances, Lenin 

could not herp but use some of the ideas of Tkachev. 

However, it is not sirnply that the same ideas can be found 

in their writings, but also that Lenin alrnost unquarifiedly 

endorsed Tkachevts writings.22s 

There can be rittle doubt that Lenin incorporated a

great dear of Tkachev's thought into his own. He did not 

berieve arr of Tkachevts ideas but used those, especiarly 

concerning the use of the state and the revolutionary, to bring about his form of tMarxism'f to Russia. As the next 

chapter wirr irrustrate, he also was influence by Nechaev, a

rrdisciprett of Tkachev. rn a debate amonq soviet schorars, 

particurarly N.N. Baturin and s.r. Mitskevich, soon after the revolution, Mitskevich wrote the forrowing in defence of 

the Russian Jacobins: 

Let Comrade Baturin not tell_ me that they(the 

Russian Jacobins) were not genuine prorelarian sociarists. r know that, but r also know that it is 

necessary to think diarecticalry and not to linit 

oneself to saying yes, y€s and no, Do. The Russian 

Jacobins lrere the forerunners of iussian 

revolutionary Marxism, brrt they were not yet 

revolutionary Marxists. 226  

> Tkachev

and Lenin held different views on what 

socialism wourd be. However, their tactics were virtually 

Backgroutrd,,, 3L7 . 

> 225

weeks, The First Bolshevik, 74.  

> 226

Mitskevj-chr €rs quoted in Weeks, The First Bolshevik , L79. L22 

the same. Lenin rrbolshevizedrr Tkachevrs ideas. Max Nomad, 

the brilliant historian, called Tkachevrs idea of a

revolutionary dictatorship as rrborshevisn with the Marxist verbiage onitted.na?7 Though he may not have been rrThe 

First Bolsheviktr as Weeks refers to him, he definitely contributed to the development of Lenin's thought.    

> 227 ylax Nomad,

Apostles of Revolution, ( Boston: 

Little, Brown and Compdtry, 1939), 2L6. CITAPTER SIX: NECHAEV AND IIENTN 

The Russian reformers developed frorn the 

Decembrists onwards. The early 1860rs was the first real 

break between the radicals, of revolutionaries, and the 

moderates. However, the late l-860rs and 1870ts were to see 

splits within the radical camp itself; splits which were to 

foreshadow the future breakup of the RSDLP. The base of the 

dispute centered around the role of the revolutionary and 

the tactics which the revolutionary movement should pursue. 

Most favoured propaganda and/or agitation, however, a few, 

of whom the most notable were Tkachev and Nechaev, swayed 

towards Jacobinism and revolution. That is where rnost 

wanted to work with the peasants and workers to educate thern 

about the revolution or inforrn them of the ills of Russian 

society, which most already knew of. Those who followed 

Tkachev and Nechaev wanted to make the revolution and 

destroy the autocracy. Prirnary in their thought was not 

construction of a new order, but destruction of the old 

order. Nechaev carried on with Tkachevrs ideas but took 

them to new extremes. Whereas Tkachev was prirnarily a

> L23 ]-24

theorist, Nechaev was an activist and was rrpossessedtf with 

the will to personally change the Russian situation. 

Nechaevts main contribution to Leninrs thought can 

be found by examining Nechaevts revolutionary career and in  

> rrThe

Revolutionary Catechismrr, which is concerned with 

defining the duties and role of the rrprofessional 

revolutionaryrr. Nechaev built upon the concept of the 

revolutionary, using ideas which originated in 

Chernyshevsky's Rakhmetov and Tkachev's own writings. An 

examination of Nechaevts life, which was lived as a

rrprofessional revolutionaryrr, and an examination of 

Nechaev's views on revolutionaries wilr irlustrate the debt 

which Lenin owes to Nechaev. Little is 1eft of Nechaevrs 

writings, as much of it was destroyed by either the Tsarist  

> Government

or his rrcomradesrr. This chapter wirr not be abre 

to prove Leninrs debt to Nechaev, which is irnpossible, but 

it will illustrate the sinilarities in Nechaev and Lenin. 

Lenin did not outwardly discuss Nechaev in his writings, but 

his contemporaries did record some of what Lenin said of Nechaev. By doing this it should becorne obvious that Lenin was indeed influenced in his thought by the revolutionary  

> whom

Dostoevsky caIled, rrThe possessedrr.   

> THE EARI,Y NECIIAEV

Sergei Genadeivich Nechaev was born on September 

2oth, L847 in the town of rvanovo, about 350 krn northeast of L25   

> Moscow.228 The

only account of his chirdhood comes from 

his sister, F.A. postnikova. His sister recal_led his 

childhood to a soviet historian in Lg22 when she was 

seventy-six years old. Therefore, much of what she recarred  

> was

biased towards Nechaev, who had become a family legend. 

However, some things are known to be true. sergei and his 

two sisters were brought up by their grandparents until his 

father remarried (his rnother had died). His father was a

sign-painter and his step-rnother was a dressrnaker. Nechaev 

grew up in the environment of rvanovo, which was beconing  

> rrThe

Russian Manchesterr. His sister recalls that sergei had an intense hatred of their materiar rife. Nechaev was 

put to work when he was nine or ten as a messenger boy in a

factory. This job did not last long as Nechaev rost a

letter he was derivering. According to his sister, this 

event shaped his character, building his resorve to educate 

himself.2ze whether this is true or not is hard to te1I, but Nechaev did proceed to educate hirnself in order to 

escape from the drudgery of fvanovo. 

The first solid materiar that there is on Nechaev 

places him in rvanovo in 1963. Nechaev $/as a sixteen year 

old sign painter, forlowing the footsteps of his grandfather and father. rn his spare tirne, of which he seemed to have a 

> 228

phirip pomper, sgrgei Nechaev. (New Brunswick,  

> New

Jersey: Rutgers Universitt press, 197gi, 4.  

> 22e

rbid., 23g-240. L26 

lot, Nechaev worked at educating himself in the gymnasiurn 

curriculum. A number of letters exist between Nechaev and 

another young rnan from rvanovo, Nefedov, who had escaped the drudgery of rvanovo for Moscow. These two young men hrere 

both influenced by v.A. Dementev, a mod.erate radical writer.  

> Dementev

had introduced Nechaev and Nefedov to cultural activities and radical ideas.230 The departure of Dementev 

and Nefedov for Moscow must have been a considerable blow to Nechaev. Nechaevts letters to Nefedov contained pleas for 

more books to help hirn with his studies. rn these letters  

> Nechaev

expressed a burning desire to escape the drudgery of 

Ivanovo. He wrote the following to Nefedov in 1964: 

f 'm studying assiduously, and there's no other hray: 

the bunpy road I travel knocks me about 

unbelievabry. Reality very indelicately grabs at me 

with its clurnsy paws and forces me to rnlxe enormous 

leaps. Ah! The sooner f can climb out of this 

place the better. Anyway, this acquaintance with 

reality is useful, because it doesnrt permit me to sink into apathy and conternplate the worldrs charmsl 

constant analysis of my surroundings gives me a true 

understanding of my own strength.al 

rn the above passage, Nechaev's impatient character can be 

seen. This feeling of a need to escape the situation as 

quickly as possibre can be seen in his later writings on 

revolutionaries and revolution and in his own rife's activities.   

> 230 Gleason,
> 231 Nechaev

Nechaev, 14-L5.  

> Young

Russia, 

to Nefedov, as 

> 34L-342.

quoted in Pomper, Serqei L27 

fn August of 1965, Nechaev moved to Moscow. 

However, instead of trying to get into a gymnasium, he 

decided to take the examinations for the post of elementary-

schoor teacher. He did not pass the exam and soon, in April of 1866, he moved to st petersburg. He arrived in st 

Petersburg soon after Karakozov's attempt on the Tsarrs 

rife. Karakozov' s actions made a strong irnpression on 

Nechaev. He wrote that, 

The foundations of our sacred cause were raid by  

> Karakozov

on the morning of the 4th of April, 1866. 

. His action must be regarded as a irologue. Let us act, mv friends, in such a way th;t the play 

will soon b"gin.zlz   

> Between 1856

and 1869, Nechaev would be transformed from an 

uncultured youth from the provinces into the epitome of the 

professional revolutionary. 

once he had moved to st petersburg, Nechaev once 

again took the examinations for the post of erementary 

schoor teacher, and this time he passed. Not a lot is known 

of Nechaev's rife in the capitar. Having passed his exams,  

> Nechaev

got a post teaching bibre in the sergievskii 

parochiar schoor. we know that this was onry a temporary 

job as in a retter to Nefedov on october 23, Lg64, before he 

himself had become a teacher, he wrote, 

r recentry visited Aleksander's father's schooli the course^of study is not bad, but it's a pity that most of the time is wasted on the teaching-and study   

> 232 Nec_haev,

as quoted in Venturi, The Roots of Revolution,361. L28 

of the B-iJcler. it appears to be their major  

> subj

ect. 233  

> However,

Nechaev's followers courd find usefur applications 

for the bible. The police found a note in Kapatsinskii's 

papers from Ametistov, a discipre of Nechaev's, which told Kapatsinskii to transrnit the ilallegoryrr in two passages of 

Luke- The two passages, verses nine and seventeen, are as 

follows:   

> And now

arso the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into-the iir".  

> whose

fan is in his hand, and he wirl thoroughly purge his floor and wirl gather the wheat inio tris garner; but the chaff he wilr burn with fire unquench651".23a  

> These

two passages illustrate Nechaevrs preoccupation with 

the destruction of the revilrr autocracy. This same theme 

can be found in much of Lenin's writings. 

As mentioned earlier, when he first moved to 

Petersburg, he convinced his old friend from rvanovo, 

Aleksei Kapatsinskii, to come and room with hirn in the 

capitar. Kapatsinskii was later arrested in 1869 and at 

that tine gave a deposition to the porice about Nechaev. 

This character sketch was given before Nechaev had hatched 

his prot to kirl rvanov and is one of the best sources on  

> Nechaev

for the years around 1g67-6g. Here are some 

excerpts:   

> Nechaevr dS

quoted in pornper, Nechaev, 26. 

As taken from fbid., 26. 

> 233 234 L29

The first impression Nechaev makes is unpleasant yet 

actually seductive. . In debate he wiII try to trick and hurniliate his opponent-he is a talented 

dialectician and knows how to touch the most 

sensitive areas of a young conscience: truth, 

honesty, couraqe, etc. He won,t tolerate people who 

are his equals, and with those stronger than he, 

maintains a strict silence and tries to cast a 

> shadow

of suspicion over then. He is extremely firm in his convictions, but out of self-esteem, to which 

he is prepared to sacrifice everybody. Thus, the main traits of his character are despotism and self-esteem. AII his declamations are full of passion, 

but very bilious. He stimulates interest in himself, and the more impressionable and naive 

simply worship hirn, the latter a necessary condition 

of any friendsnip with hir.235 

Nechaev, already at this early stage in his life, was living 

as he professed a professional revolutionary should. He was  

> consumed

with a passion for changing the situation in 

Russian and believed that he was the one to do it. He  

> dernanded

iron discipline, rrworshiprr as Kapatsinskii put it, of his followers, something which Lenin would later pick up 

> on.

One influence on Nechaev is known for certain and 

that is the influence of P.N. Tkachev. As mentioned in the 

previous chapter, Tkachev had been a radical panphleteer and 

activist for six years before he met Nechaev sometirne in late 1866 or early L867. By 1868, they had become close 

collaborators. The influence of Tkachev can be seen in the 

first political pronouncenents of Nechaev.235 Tkachev and  

> Nechaev

shared sirnilar views on the role of the masses,  

> 235

As taken from rbid., 23-24.  

> 236

Gleason, Younq Russia, 343-344. 130  

> Nechaev

easily accepting Tkachev's "jacobinismr. Both of  

> them beronged

to an informal circre which discussed the 

works of Buonarrotti, Babeuf, and other rfJacobinrl 

ideas.237 rn the fall of 1968-69, they were to have a 

> chance

to spread and use their theories as another wave of student demonstrations broke out. 

shortly after the farl semester began, a new radicar 

emigre journar, Peoplets cause, started to circurate amongst 

the students. The primary writer in this journal was 

Bakunin. Bakunin calred for total revolution and aroused 

the radicar syrnpathies amongst the students. This was 

Nechaev's first reading of Bakunin and it probably herped 

hirn to develop his idea that arr revorutionaries should 

withdraw from academics, literature and study and concern 

oneself only with matters of revolution.238 The issue which sparked off the student demonstrations was the banni-ng of student corporations; that is student mutual societies. However, this tine around, 

the student demonstrators themserves were at odds with each 

other. There was a growing sptit between the moderates, who 

wanted the student corporations legalized, and the radicals, led in part by Nechaev and Tkachev, who wanted to use 

confrontation tactics for revolutionary purposes. Tkachev 

and Nechaev, with severar others, did attempt to set up a

rbid., 344-345. 

rbid., 345-346. 

> 237 238 131

revolutionary organization, and to that effect, they wanted 

the corlapse of the movement to legarize the student 

corporations. They believed that this would radicalized  

> more

students. This is an underlying theme in much of  

> Nechaevts

writings; compromising the reformers to radicalize 

them further. Tkachev, Nechaev, and their associates 

believed that there wourd be a peasant revolution on Feb 

19th, L87O. This was the ninth anniversary of the emancipation edict, and the peasants had to decide whether 

to reave the landr oF stay with an obrigation to pay the 

state back for freeing thern. This never materiarized.. 

However, they drafted a program during the student demonstrations entitled, proqram of Revolutionary Action, 

which outlined their rough timetable.z3e This program 

wirr be discussed in rnore detair when dearing with  

> Nechaevrs

ideas. The student demonstrations ended unexpectedly when a

confrontation between a student and a professor led to the 

expulsion of the student. This in turn Ied to petitions, the disruption of classes, more expulsions and some arrests. 

rt was actually the moderates who took the lead, but some 

radicals, Tkachev in particular, v/ere arrested. However,  

> Nechaev,

true to his form, concocted a dramatic exit. A

note was derivered by mail to Vera zasulich(who was to  

> 23e

Gleason, young Russia, 347-349. Pfogram of Revolutionary Action see second 

chapter and Appendix (1). 

> For

half more on the 

of this L32  

> become

famous as a member of the peoples' wirl). The note 

was dropped by a hand from a carriage, some stories said it 

was a porice coach, and derivered to zasurich. The note 

said the following, r am being taken to a fortress, r don't know which. 

Let the comrades know about it: r hope to see thern 

again; let them keep on working for the caus"-*o-----

This was arl an elaborate pran of Nechaev's to build up his image- No one had escaped from the peter and paul Fortress, 

but people believed that he had. when he arrived in Geneva 

to meet with Bakunin and the emigre leaders, he had built a

reputation as a revolutionary. Nechaev realized that the 

revorutionary cause needed a leader whom they could worship; 

that is a leader who has performed regendary feats. Nechaev 

would meet, and also trick, the emigre leaders and then 

return to Russia with the backing of their names. This he 

hoped would bring more strength to nthe causer. The rnethods 

that Nechaev used, in particular his disciprine and 

organizational methods, were taken and mourded to Marxist 

thought by Lenin.      

> NECIIAEV AND BAKUNIN, RETURN, AND !,IURDER.

what forrows is a brief examination of Nechaev's 

dealings with the enigres, the forrnation of his 

organizational celrs, and his downfall. Many of the   

> 240 Nechaev

in Max Nonad,  

> 2L9-220.

Apostles of Revolution, 133 

tactics used by Nechaev would later be copied by Lenin, 

although with a much more focused goal. This will be 

discussed in the next section. 

It is difficult to place exactly when and how  

> Nechaev

met Bakunin. However, it was probably in the second 

week of April, 1869, in Geneva. Bakunin, who had been out 

of touch with the affairs of Russia, was obviously 

captivated by this doninatinq revorutionary. He wrote to  

> James

Guillaume, that: At present I am engrossed in Russian affairs. Our 

youth, theoretically and in practice the most 

revolutionary in the world, is in great ferment. .

. I have here with me now one of those young 

fanatics who know no doubts, who fear noltring, who 

rearize that many of them wirl perish at the hands 

of the government but who nevertheless have decided 

that they will not relent until the people rise. 

They are magnificent, these young fanatics. 

Believers without God and heioes without   

> phrases !241

For Bakunin, Nechaev was an exciting breath of fresh air.  

> He

was captivated by Nechaev, who for hirn, ernbodied a

student of revorution to spread the gospel of revolution. 

However, quite the opposite would soon happen, Nechaev 

influencing Bakunin. 

In the summer of 1969, Nechaev, Bakunin, and  

> ogarevz4z

collaborated on many articles and proclamations. 

rt is difficult, with many of them, to determj-ne who wrote  

> 241

Bakunin, talking 

Gleason, Young Russia, 354. 

212 see Appendix rff 

about Nechaev. As quoted in for more on Bakunin and Ogarev. 134 

what, but Nechaev definitely wrote three of them: rTo the 

students of the University, Academy, and Technological 

rnstituterr, ttPrinciples of Revolutionrr, and the f irst issue 

of Narodnaia Rasprava, the rrPeoples/ Vengeancett.243  

> Nechaev

sent these proclamations, incruding those written by 

Bakunin and ogarev, to Russia via the rnair. He originarry did not try to disguise them too much and many of them were 

intercepted by the authorities. This caused many people to 

be detained by the police and questioned. rn st. petersburg 

alone, dt one postal station, 560 proclamations were 

detained and 387 people were arrested or invorved. some 

argue that Nechaev was simply careless. However, his character and other actions seem to say otherwise. Max  

> Nomad

suggests that this was not due to any lack of 

intelligence on Nechaevts part, but was rather a concerted 

atternpt to get people into troubre, thus, radicalizing them 

and pushing them more towards the path of fanaticism.244 The most irnportant document that they produced at 

this time was rrThe Catechism of a Revolutionary,r . zas The 

catechism outrined the duties and role that a revorutionary 

shourd play. The rures set out in the catechism are opposed 

> 213 244
> 245

in full in 

Pomper, Nechaev, 83-84.  

> Nornad,

Apostles of Revolution , 223-224.  

> rrThe

Catechism of a Revolutionaryrr is reprinted 

Appendix If. L35 

to even the most conventional rnorality. For exarnple, the catechism states that the revolutionary rnust be, 

stern with himserf, he must be stern with others as 

well. All tender, effeminizing feelings of kinship, 

friendship, love, gratitude, and even of honour 

itself must be suppressed in hin by a total cold 

passion for the revolutionary cause. For him there 

exists gnly one comfort, one consolation, reward, 

and satisfaction-the success of the revolution. Day 

and night he must have one thought, one goal, he 

must always be ready to perisn hirnself aia to 

destroy with his^.own hands everything that hinders 

its realization. za6 

This passage illustrates the dedication to the revorution 

that Nechaev demanded and Lenin would later demand. This  

> component

of the catechisrn will be discussed in the next 

section. 

The catechisrn is also interesting in that there is 

debate about who actuarly wrote it. some say that it was  

> Nechaev,

while others believe it was Bakunin, and indeed one 

copy did exist in his handwriting. However, phirip pornper  

> makes

the strongest argument in the case for joint authorship. He argues that Bakunin v/as responsibre for stylistic changes, as weII as input into the 

contentrparticularly of the first section, while Nechaev 

infused his fanaticism and martyrdorn into ia.2a7 The 

resurt, for Pomper, is that the catechism, however it was 

as taken from pomper, 

rbid., 90.  

> 216
> 247
> Nechaev, 91. 136

compired, represents Nechaevrs ideasl rthe final irnpact of 

the rrCatechismrr is Nechaevistrr .248 

Herzen, who untit this time had kept clear of 

Nechaev, hras forced to aid his cause. Herzen and ogarev had  

> come

into the possession of 20 ooo francs of the Bakhmetev 

Fund, in 1858. This was reft to then by a paver Bakhmetev, 

a young Russian nobleman, and they were to use it for revolutionary propaganda. However, Herzen had used shrewd 

investments and they were able to use just the interest. 

Therefore, in 1869, the originar sum was stirl intact and as 

ogarev had a right to the fund, Herzen was in no position to 

deny hin half of it. rn late July of 1869, oqarev received 

roughly 8 000 francs, of which most of it he passed on to 

> Nechaev.24e

Nechaev, armed with this money, the catechism, and a

handful of other proclamations returned to Russia and made 

his way to Moscow. rn Moscow, Nechaev went about setting up 

celrs of his organization. He was reratively unknown in  

> Moscow

except by uspensky and cherkezov, and most knew him 

as rvan Petrovich pavrov. Nechaev had fabricated the 

existence of rrThe committeerr. The cornmittee was the supreme 

body of Nechaevts organization, but in reality was sirnply  

> 218

philip pomper, rBakunin, Nechaev, and the rrcatechism of a Revolutionaryr: Tire case for Joint Authorship. tt , in Canadian-Ame -American Slavic Studies. 10:4 

(Winter L976), 546.  

> 249

Pomper, Nechaev, 96. L37  

> Nechaev

hinself. whenever something had to be done which was not completely within the norms of Nechaevrs pawns,  

> Nechaev

would simply issue an order from The conmittee. 

Most of Nechaev's activi-ty was in Moscow, so he placed the 

Committee in St petersburg. 

The first cell which Neehaev created was the resurt of his acquaintance with uspensky, who had good connections and was known to Nechaev. The first circle, The petrovsky  

> Acaderny

circre, had as its prinary members Nikolai Dolgov, 

rvan rvanov, Areksei Kuznetsov, and Fedor Ripman. This 

circle, or celr, was the founding circle of The society of 

the People's Revenge.25. Later they were joined by rvan 

Pryzhov, who technicarly beronged to the lesser nobirity, but did not fit in anywhere in society. 251 His father was 

one of the few cases of a person rising from a serf to nobility in a single generation. pryzhov, through his 

research into taverns in Russia, knew the seedier side of  

> Moscow,

and Nechaev inrnediatery saw some potentiar in gli=.zsz Each of the members of this first circre in turn 

created their own circles of around five members. rn this 

wdy, the members of the circles would only know of their circle(s). This would help to protect against any 

> 250
> 251

Kuznetsov, 

> 252

rbid. , 99-103. 

For more on Uspensky, Cherkezov, Dolgov, fvanov, Ripnan and pry2hov, see Appendix IfI 

Gleason, young Russia, 363-366. l_38 

infirtration by spies. However, this arso arrowed Nechaev 

to keep everyone in the dark.253 Anytine his authority was 

questioned he wourd sirnply state that it was not he, but the 

conmittee which gave the order. To ensure discipline the 

cornmittee was always watching then. rn this way Nechaev was 

able to gain almost complete control of the members of his 

organization. However, soon he wourd be charlenged and he 

would reply with murder! 

rvanov was growj-ng increasingly independent and 

probably was doubting the existence of the comnittee. He 

got into a disagreement with Nechaev over the posting of a

proclamation at the petrovsky Agricurtural Acaderny. cerman 

Lopatin, who wanted to expose Nechaev for what he was, rater investigated what actually happened. He believed that 

rvanovts unwirlingness to donate more money to the cause, 

that is, to Nechaev, was also a factor. what came of arI this is that Nechaev, together with uspensky, Kuznetsov, 

Pryzhov, and Nikoraev, a friend of Nechaevrs from rvanovo who had joined their group, planned the murder of rvanov, who in their eyes was no ronger dedicated to the peoplers  

> Vengeance, and

must, therefore, be liquiaated. Nechaev    

> 253 Nec-haev deveroped

his ideas on his organization on his own. However, he iras probably infruence by rshutinrs group within ,organi-zationr, intitlsi rHg11,,. Herr was responsible for_keeping an eye on the activiti"=-"i [n. rarger' more moderale, qroup. Arnong other thingsr-u"tt n.a the rrrighgtt to assassinite rnembers iho were no ronger ,in good standingil. L39 

convinced all the others that this was what needed to be 

> done.

The murder itserf was carried out very poorly. They 

strangled rvanov in a grotto and durnped his body through a

hole in the ice of a pond. However, Nechaev's hands were 

badry bitten by rvanov in the struggre, Nechaev left his hat 

in the grotto, and the body was found four days rater. After the body was found, the police investigated and 

Pryzhov, Nikoraev, and uspensky were soon arrested. After the murder, Nechaev and Kuznetsov reft for petersburg and  

> Nechaev

said to him, rryourre now a doomed manr, quoting from 

his catechisrn. Kuznetsov was picked up in petersburg i-n 

early December but Nechaev managed to elude the police and 

fred again into exire. A1l in all, Ls2 people were arrested 

and 79 tried. uspensky was mistakenly hanged by his ferrow 

prisoners in siberia as a police spy. onry Kuznetsov wourd 

return to revolutionary activity after his jair term.254  

> Rumours

about rvanovrs murder had spread to Geneva, 

but the truth was not known when Nechaev first appeared on 

the scene. The details of Nechaevrs second trip abroad are 

not irnportant for the purposes of this thesis except in 

sunmary. He was in exile for eighteen months before being 

betrayed to the Tsarist police. During that time he wrote, 

organized and published leaflets and pamphlets and decrared 

himserf the sor-e representative abroad of a1r Russian  

> 254

rbid. , 370--373. 140 

revorutionaries. More importantly, his attitude towards the 

revolutionaries changed. He now manipulated Bakunin and the 

other emigres.255 with Herzen dead, he made advances 

towards his daughter, Natalie, in order to gain her wearth.  

> He

had broke with Bakunin, once Bakunin realized the truth 

about rvanovts murder and about Nechaev's true beliefs,  

> Nechaev

stole retters beronging to Bakunin, ogarev, and 

Natalie Herzen, to use as bracknair if he so decided. After they found out what Nechaev had taken, he said, ryes, that is our system. we regard as enemies and are obliged to 

deceive and cornpromise alr those who are not whorly with  

> gg. rr255

whire Nechaev was in London, in 1g70, he pubrished 

an eight page periodical, obshchina. The aim of this journal  

> seemed

to be to telI the west European radical press who he, 

and his likes, were and what they wanted. some of it is as 

follows:  

> we

are the chirdren of hungry, deprived fathers and of mothers who have been aiiven tb stupefaciion ana inbecility. we grew up surrounded uy iirtrr ana 

ignorance, amongl-insulls and humiiiiii""=;--rrt,n tn" cradle-we were despised and oppressed by everv possibre scoundrer who rives irippily ""i", il; existing order. . we are tfr'ey whose whole past overflowed with bitterness and suiferj-ng, wnose 

future hords the sarne hurniriations, ins..lit=, -n".rgrv 

days, sreepless nights, and finarry tiiairl'i"ir!,' prisons, tfe mines, o, the ga1lows. We find ourselves in an unbearable position and, =or"now or  

> 2s5

venturi,  

> 256 Nechaev

Revolution, 163.  

> The

Roots of Revolution, 381-382. 

as quoted in yarmolJ_nsky, Road to 141 

otherr we want to get out of it. That is why in the alteration of the existing order of social i.t.tiotr= consists all our wished for aspirations, iri "rr" cherished aims. we can want oirty a popurar 

revolution. we want it and we w-irt ioal" ig.25z 

rt is clear in this passage that Nechaev, unrike many of the 

intelligentsia, h/as conscious of his class roots. He was 

not a bourgeois intelrectuar. rn his writings can be found 

class hatred. This is sornething which Lenin, coming frorn a

bourgeois family, did not share with hirn.  

> Nechaev

eventuarly was betrayed to the Russian 

secret porice in switzerrand on August r-4th, Lg72. The 

swiss agreed to extradite hirn onry if he was tried as a 

> conmon

criminal for the murder of rvanov. They were not 

wirling to extradite him as a politicar prisoner. rn January of 1873, Nechaev was tried for the murder of rvanov, 

found guilty, and sentenced to twenty years hard labour to 

be forlowed by exile in siberia. However, his declarations 

at his trial and his civic executi-on, the public stripping of all civil rights, were enough to cause the Tsar to write that, ttAs a resurt of this we have every right to have hirn 

tried again as a politicar crirninal. But r don't think that this would be of much use. rt would only stir up passions.  

> And

so the more prudent course is to keep him for ever in  

> 257 Nechaev,

Russia, 340.  

> ftObshchiDdtt,

as quoted in Gleason, young L42 

prison. t258 The Tsar hirnself underrined these words and   

> Nechaev, unknown

to armost everyone, was kept in prison, not 

sent to exile in siberia as he was sentenced by the legal court.   

> Nechaev was

to have one more event in his tife. while he was in prison he managed to sway most of the 

guards, rrpeasants in uniformsr, to help him srnuggle notes to 

and frorn the members of Narodnaya vo1ya, The people's wilI. 

However, once the peoplers wirl accomplished their task of 

assassinating the Tsar, Nechaev's influence was found out, 

the guards punished, and Nechaev died a lonely, completery 

isolated life.    

> NECHAEV's wRrrrNGs-THE EPrroI,tE oF

A REvorJurroNARy  

> The

preceding pages have outri_ned the life of sergei 

Nechaev. He lived his rife as a revolutionary, following 

the rules he laid out in his 'Revolutionary catechisrn'r. His 

writings must be taken in context with his place in the 

revolutionary movement. Nechaev wrote mostry of 

revolutionaries and their duties, but there is some material 

on crassrand the revolution in his writings as werl. Three 

sources will be examined to gauge Nechaev's views on class, 

the Party(revolutionaries), and the Revorution. These 

t1t..= quoted in venturi, Roots of Revolution, 3g7. 

Tsar himself underlined the woras "tor everr. rte truly Nechaev as an extremery dangerous politicar prisoner.  

> The
> savt t-4 3

sources are: rrA Program of Revolutionary Actionr, nThe 

Revolutionary catechism', and rFundamentar Thesesr, 

Nechaevts last, poritical tract. By doing so, the influence 

of Nechaev upon Lenin, with respect to these areas, shourd  

> become

clear. rn rrA Program of Revorutionary Actionr r 259 Nechaev 

is concerned with laying out what shourd be done for the 

upcoming revolution. (see above) He says the forlowing about 

the situation in Russia: we cannot fail to recognize that the chief reason 

for the misery of our soci-ety issues from its bad 

economic structure, perrnitting and legitirnating the 

dominance of the strong over the weak, tne 

parasitism of the capitalist on the exhausted 

worker. - They[capitalists] gather up from them 

the entire product-or Lneir 1ab6ui, reaviirg then 

only the bare essentiars to sustain their fiungry and 

cold existence. rf you reflect about whalrs around y_9u, it must seem like a kingdorn of the 

insane. 260  

> Nechaev

berievedr €rs did rnany others, that the working 

classes $/ere downtrodden and that something must be done 

about it. He also believed that the working crass would 

need assistance in rearizing the need for change. He 

continues in the rrprogram,, by stating that the rnarod. wirr realize that right and night are on its side, and then they 

wirl be victorious. This outcorne is inevitable. Everything 

we do must hasten it, by explaining to the narod its   

> 25e rr

A program of Revorutionary Action, is reprinted in fuIl in Appendix I.  

> 260

Necha"rf_ ttl prograrn of Revolutionary Actionrr r Ers 

quoted in Pomper, Nechaev, 56. L44 

strength, the necessity of unification and revolt.1126l  

> Nechaev

did not berieve that the masses, on their own could 

do anything to change their situation. He rearized that they, the revorutionaries, must hasten it by prodding the peopre to revolt and revolution. Nechaev, just like his 

corleague Tkachev, believed that what was needed was a

revorutionary party, to nake the revolution for the peopre.  

> Nechaev

wrote in the rRevolutionary catechismr, that the revolutionaries must prepare for revolution and spur the  

> masses

to revort. Take the fo110wing excerpts for example: 

16. when a rist of those who are condemned is rnade 

and the order of execution is prepared, no private sense of outrage should be considered,'nor is it necessary to pay attention to the hatred provoked by 

these people among the comrades or the people 

Hatred and the sense of outrage may even be usefur in so far as they incite the masses to revolt L7. The second group comprises those who will be 

spared for the time being in order that, by a series of monstrous acts, they lnay drive the peopi" into revolt. 22. The society has no aim other than the comprete 

liberation and happiness of the masses-i.e., of the people who live by manual labour. convinced that their emancipation and the achievement or this happiness can only come about as a resurt of an arr-destroying popuJ-ar revolt, the society will use a1r rE,s resources. -and energy toward increasing and 

intensifylng the evirs-lnd miseries or in6 peopre 

until at last their patience is ex,hausted aira tney 

are driven to a general uprising.262  

> 261

rbid., s7.   

> 262 Nechaev,

as taken from nThe Revolutionary catechismrr, in payne, The Life and Death of Lenin, iz-zg. 145   

> Nechaev, €rs

a Jacobin, did not fully trust the masses, but  

> worked

in their behalf. He wanted to use the masses as a

revorutionary force. He was of the belief that the worse 

off the people, the better the chances for revolution. only a little in Nechaevrs writings can be found 

about the nature and the timing of the revolution. He 

understood, as did Lenin, that one courd make a revorution.  

> Nechaev

believed that the urtimate goal was a social 

revolution: the full freedom of_the rejuvenated personarity 

lies in social revolution. -only a radical reconstruction of absurd and unjust sociar relations can give peopre enduring and geiuine happiness 

as long as the present poritical structir-re of society exists, economic reforrns are impossibre, and 

the only way out-is political revolutioir, the 

annihiration of the nesting praces of the existing power, a reform of the state. Thus, social 

revolution-is our final goal ana poiiticat 

revolu_tion-is the only means for lchieving this goa1.263  

> Nechaev, and

Lenin after him, did not think that a social 

revolution was an innediately attainabre goa1. poritical revorution, the overthrow of Russian autocracy, was the 

first step in revolution. Nechaev berieved that there were 

historical laws, but that these raws vtrere not bound by tirne.  

> He

wrote that,   

> one rnust

recognize the historical law and, not 

waiting for this law to appear in all of its fullness by virtue of tirne and circurnstance, which 

is inevitabre-since arl things occur in due course-

to hasten this developnent, prepare it, try to    

> 26s Nechaev, t'A program

of Revolutionary Action, in Pomper, Nechaev, 57. ]-46 

affect minds in such a way that this development 

wourd not be unexpected for them and they w-ould act consciously, as ca1mly as possible..z6a  

> He

put forth the idea that one could berieve in the determinacy of history, but at the same tine could act as a

voluntarist.  

> Nechaev

also put forward ideas on the nature of the 

revolution in his rrRevolutionary Catechism'r. He outlined the need for a revorution which wourd fundamentarly arter society. Although he stated the necessity for a poriticar revorution, he arso stressed the need for social changes.  

> Take

the following excerpts from the catechism as exampres: 

23- By a revorution the society does not mean an 

orderry revort according to the classic western 

model-a revolt which, arways stops short of attacking the rights of property and the Lraditionar sociar systems of so-carred civilization and morality. . The onry form of revolution beneficial to Lhe 

peopre is one which destroys the entire state to the roots and exterminates alr the state traditions, institutions and classes i-n Russia. 

24. with this end in view, the society therefore refuses to impose any new organization from above. 

Any future organization will doubtless work its way 

through the movement and life of the people; but 

this is a matter for future generatio-ns Lo decide. Our task is terrible, E9ta1, universal, and 

merciless destruction.265 

Nechaev's conception of destruction, total and merciless, is 

something which can be found in Leninrs thought as werr. As 

discussed in chapter Two, Leni-n was concerned not so much  

> 2&

rbid., s7 .  

> 265 Nechaev

frorn rThe 

Payne, The Life and Death of Revolutionary Catechismr, in Lenin, 28. L47 

with the sociar revorutionr €rs with the political revolution; the destruction of the ord regirne. However, the 

greatest influence that Nechaev writings had upon Lenin, is the role of the professional revolutionary.  

> Nechaevr

ds mentioned, lived his rife as he dictated others to live theirs. His conception of a revolutionary involved a number of key components including, ruthlessness, 

extreme discipline, and a willingness to sacrifice oneserf 

for the cause. rn tA program of Revorutionary Action',  

> Nechaev

calls for the need to ,define in detail the 

structure and rules of the revolutionary organizationr, and 

for the drawing up of a catechism to crarify these 

rules.26 on his first trip abroad Nechaev did just that, 

and drew up, with the aid of Bakunin, nThe Revolutionary 

catechismtr. The catechi-srn can be considered a guide to revorutionary behaviour and much of the content of it can be 

found also in the Bolshevi-k party's code of discipline. The 

catechisrn has been incruded in full as an Appendix, but here 

are some excerpts: 

1. The revolutionary is a doomed man. He has no personal interests, no business affairs, no 

emotionsr Do attachments, no propeFty, no name 

3- The revorutionary despises all doctrines and 

refuses to accept the rnundane sciences, reaving them 

f-"r future generations. He knows onry one science: the science of destruction 

4- The revolutionary despises public opinion. He 

despises and hates the existing social^rnorality in  

> 256

Nechaev, in pornperrNechaev, 59 148 

all its manifestations. For him, morality is everything which contributes to ihe triuroin or tne 

revolution. rmmorar and crirninar is everlthing that stands in its way. 

6. Tyrannical toward himself, he must be tyrannicar 

toward others. A1l . the gentre and enervat-ing 

sentirnents of kinship, love, friendship, graf,itude 

and even honour must be.suppressed in irim-and give 

prace to the cord and single-ninded passion for revolution .267 

These excerpts shourd grive a good account of Nechaev's views 

on the rore of the revolutionary. Recarling Lenin's call for professional revolutionaries, it becomes cLear that 

Lenin must have been influenced in this respect by Nechaev.  

> CONCIJUSION
> Nechaev

rived and died the tife of the revorutionary 

which he portrayed in his Revolutionary catechism. 

spasovich, the great Russian barrister, said of Nechaev at 

the trail of Nechaev's followers that he was, ,,A 

revolutionist of the deed and not of the rn,6y6tr .268 rndeed 

rittle is left of Nechaevrs writings, of which there hrere 

never many. As previously nentioned it is, thus, hard to 

prove Lenints debt to Nechaev. However, some secondary 

evidence is available, as werl as some of Leninrs own word.s, 

as recalred by others. onry one issue of Nechaevrs journar, obshchina' ever appeared. However, Lenin, over thirty years  

> 257

excerpts fron Nechaev's rrRe 

Payne, ,

volutionary Catechismrl 

pp 24-25. ln 

28 Nomad, Apostles of Revolution, 2L6. L49 

later still gave this one issue great importance as one of 

the revolutionary journars worthy of republication.z6e 

Earry into the revolution, Lenin told Angerica Balbanoff, 

reprying to her question about the use of dishonest means to seize polrer, that, rEverything that is done in the interest of the proretarian cause is hones!.rr270 This is almost a

direct substitution of proletarian for revorutionary in 

Nechaev's Catechism. Maxim Gorky, the farnous Russian writer, and one-tirne 

colleague of Lenin's, wrote about Lenin's tactics during the 

early stages of the revorution. Gorky wrote, in tarking 

about the Bolsheviks, that, the sensible erements of the dernocracy must draw 

further conclusions, they must decidei is the road of conspirators and anarlnists of Nechaevrs type also their ;6u6.271 

Gorky saw that the tactics of the Bol_sheviks were virtuarly the same as the terrorists of the 1g60rs and 1g70rs. Three 

issues later, Gorky wourd again directly relate Lenin's 

tactics to Nechaev's when he wrote, rVladirnir Lenin is introducing a sociarist order in Russia by Nechaevrs method-

full stearn ahead through the swampn.zT2 fn implicating    

> 269 pomper, Nechaev

, L44.  

> 270

Leninr ds quoted in Greason, young Russia, 3gg.   

> 271 Gorky-

in Novaya Zhj,zn, No L74, Nov 7th (2o), L9L7, €rs taken from page, ieninr' SO. 272 rbid. , go. Lenin with Nechaev, Gorky was hoping to 

about Lenin's tactics. 

> 1s0

enlighten the people 

Berdyaev, once a Marxist himself, wrote of Nechaev, 

that rrhe was a zearot and a fanatic, but by nature a hero. 

As a means of realizing social revorution he preached deceit 

and pirrage and pitiless terror. rrzE Berdyaev continued by 

relating the fact that Nechaev's demand for iron disciprine 

preceded Borshevism. Rorf Theen concurs by stating that the concept of a professional revolutionary, in Leninrs thought, had a precedent in the works of Tkachev and Nechaev.2z4 

Bender points out that Lenin never wavered from his 

conception of the party as a smarl highry disciplined party.  

> He

points out that most of this must come from Nechaev.2D 

Richard Pipes ilrustrates the environment of Lenin during 

his formative years. Lenin, having been moved from Kazan to  

> samara

by his mother, met N.s. Dolgov, of Nechaev fame. 

Dorgov in turn introduced hirn to two women who had been in 

zaichnevskyts Jacobin organization.2z6 ln fact, Lenin was 

surrounded by Jacobi.ns and ex-terrorists of the peoplers 

wirl- with evidence and opinions such as these, there can 

be little doubt that Lenin was infruenced by Nechaev. 

Bonch-Bruyevich, a close friend of Lenin's and one-time  

> 2E

Berdyaev, The Russian fdea, 117-11g.  

> 274

Theen, Lenin, 75.  

> 275

Bender, The Betrayal of Marx , 1.g7.  

> 276

Pipes, Revolutionarv Russia, 33-34. 151 

secretary of people's commissars, wrote the following, clearly showing how Lenin treated Nechaev: 

Vladimir rlyich often mentioned the cunning trick the reactionaries _play with Nechayev(sic) €nrougrr 

the light-fingered hands of Dostoyevixy.' He th6ught  

> The possessed

a work of genius, uut silxening, for as a consequence people in revolutionary ciriles have started to treat Nechayev negativeiy, 

comptetely forgetting that this titanic -' 

revorutionary possessed such strength of wilr and 

enthusiasm that even when he was ii tne peiei ana 

Paur Fortress, subrnitting.to terrible conditions, 

even then he was able to influence the soldiers around him in such a way that they came whol1y under 

his infruence. peopre conpretely forget that Nechayev possessed a tarent for organization, dD 

ability to establish the speciar t6chniqu" oi conspiratorial work everywhere, and an a-uirity to give thoughts such startring formurations that they were forever printed on the memory. . Arl 0f Nechayev shourd be pubrished. rt is necessary to learn and seek out Lverything he wrote, and wirere he 

wrote, and we must decipher iff nis pseudonyms., and 

collect and print everything he wrote. And Vladimir Ilyich said these wordi nany times.277 

> 34.

2v as taken from payne, The Life and Death of Lenin, This thesis started out  

> made some

fundamental revisions   

> CIIAPTER SEVEN! CONCLUSTONS

presupposing that Lenin 

Marxts political economy 

with respect to crass, the party, and the revolution. rt 

then went on to trace the rnajor sources of these revisions 

to Russian revolutionary thought, in particurar to the 

influence of chernyshevsky, Tkachev and Nechaev. what 

resurts is a clear separation of Marx and Lenin. Marx was 

concerned prirnarily with human emancipation. He was writing in Western Europe where, for the most part, political 

ernancipation had been achieved. Lenin, living in autocratic Russia' was armost so1e1y concerned with the defeat of 

Russian Tsardom. He wanted a particurar political 

emancipation, that of Russian society. However, these three 

theorists, together with the Marxists discussed in chapter 

Three, were by no means the onry Russian thinkers who 

influenced Lenin. Many others had a rore of great 

importance in Russian revorutionary history of whorn some are 

barery known outside of Russia. These include such figures as Belinsky, Bakunin, zaichnevsky, and Zheli-abov. Together 

> by

to 

> L52 L53

they all form the indigenous stream of Russian revolutionary 

thought which inprinted itself upon Lenin's psyche.  

> Berdyaev

pointed out in some of his works, 

particularly The Russian rdea, that there were ethicar inconsistencies in the apprication of Marxian ideas by the 

Bolsheviks to the situation in Russia. He berieved that there was more than terror and Marxisrn in Russian cornmunism.  

> He

argued that one needs to have an understanding of Russian 

nysticism and its messianic thought.278 For Berdyaev, most 

Russian thinkers had a messianic component to their thought. 

That is, that throughout history, Russian thinkers, incruding peter the Great and the communists, berieved that the Russians were the chosen people.zTe The Russians wourd  

> show

the world how to proceed to a higher revel of living. rn other words, Russian chauvinism. The Russian peopre 

have been said to be, by nature, dogmatic. Everything for  

> them

takes on a religious, or pseudo-religious, aspect. Russians have always looked for a way to change their own 

drab reality. There is a need to escape in Russian thought. 280 

This need to escape is evident in chernyshevsky, Tkachev, 

and especially Nechaev. rn Nechaevrs early letters there 

were constant preas to Nefedov to help him escape from 

rvanovo. For Nechaev, the cruel rearities of capitalism in  

> 278

Berdyaev, The Russian Idea, xiv-xv.  

> 27e

rbid. , g 

> 280

rbid., 27-29. 154 

Russia, hrere too much to bear. His youth undoubtedly helped 

turn him to revolutionary activity and the pursuit of a new 

social system. Leninr dS wel-r, expressed a desire to change 

the situation and ,escaper into socialism. Lenin needed to 

escape from Russian Tsardom. His escape was more politicar 

emancipation than human emancipation.  

> Berdyaev

also claims that there are erements of Belinsky and Bakunin in Borshevism. He sees Belinsky 

asserting the Borshevik rnorality well before it was espoused 

by them. Belinsky exclaimed, 

r have come to understand the French Revolution. rhave come to understand even broodthirsty haired towards anyone who desires to separate hirnserf from his brotherhood with mankind. . I am begin"i"g to love rnankind in the manner of Marat. To nixe the smallest part of it happy I think I would 

exterminate the rest oi- it with fire and sword. The 

social organization of life, social orguni"iliorr, or 4s.9p.281 

Bakunin, despite being hostile to Marxism, had some elements 

which were conmon to Borshevik theory, including the messianic concept of Russia leading the worrd and an ranti-

democratic'r element in his anarchism.zsz Another who had a

profound affect on Lenin was the terrorist member of ,The 

Peoprets willt, Zheriabov. Leninrs sense of urgency had 

found earrier expression in zheriabov, who stated that, 

ttHistory noves too slowry, it needs a push.1283 rn brief ,281 rbid. , 

> 282

rbid.,  

> 283 Theen,
> 76-77.
> L47.

Lenin, 7L. 1s5 

in Russian thought there is a predorninance of the society 

over the individual, of the rpeopler or rproletariat' over 

the rrmanrr or worker. This can be seen in Berinsky, chernyshevsky, Tkachev, Bakunin, Nechaev, Lenin and others. 

Russian thought, in short, is not so much concerned with the 

werl-being of man in society but rather the werl-being of 

the society of men.  

> However,

this is in opposition to Marxism. Marx 

sought the liberation of man; the freeing of man frorn his state of alienation.2& He sought human emancipation. For 

Marx, the notion of man was supreme, but in Russian thought, 

the notion of the supremacy of mankind reigned. Marx 

distrusted the Russians in general. For a quarter of a

century he warned about Russiars rmessianic striving for 

world dorninatienrr.2s5 At the end of his rife, Marx 

expressed his beliefs that Russia was not ready for socialism, as envisaged by Engels and himself. He berieved, 

that under the right circumstances, the popurists' notions 

of revolution could be appricable for Russia. Marx adrnired 

the terrorisrn of Narodnaya Volya, ,The peoplers Wil1r, and 

criticized the emigre rrsociarists'. He criticized the  

> members

of the other faction of Land and Freedom, chernyi 

Peredel, whose members included plekhanov, Axelrod, and  

> 284

Berdyaev, The Russian fdea , g4-gs. 

ttt Rrrb"I, ,r The relationship of Bolshevism to Marxisrnrr in pipes, Revolutionary nu'ssii, 301. 156 

zasulich. Iqarx considered these future Russian Marxists 

utopians and said that, [the revolutionaries] who left Russia voruntariry and . in order- to carry on propaganda in nus3ia,  

> moved

to Geneva! What a quid pro quo. fhese gentlemen are against alr poriticil-revolutionary action. Russia is to nake I somersaurt into the 

anarchist-communist-atheist rnillenium! Meanwhile, 

they are preparing for this reap with the most 

tedious doctrinairism, whose so--carled principres 

are being haw\ed about the street ever -since the 

late gakrlnin.2& 

Marx, who had no love for Bakunin, did not support the early 

Russian Marxists. Rather, he supported the heroic actions 

of the terrorists who sought to assassinate the Tsar. 

Paradoxically, Marxrs politicar regacy to his Russian 

rrdisciplestt was to refrain from being Marxists and join in the common revolutionary struggle to overthrow Tsarism. 287 

Lenin' even in these respects, did not forlow Marxist 

teachings. Marx wourd have had Lenin work with the 

terrorists and populists, not against them. Lenin joined 

with Prekhanov and the early Marxists and sought to riberate 

Russian society, not Russian individuars. He did not folrow 

the path which Marx laid out for hirn. He didr ds did l,Iarx, 

hold the terrorists of Russian revolutionary tradition in high esteem and, as previousry mentioned, absorbed some of 

their ideas, particularly those of the Russian rrJacobinsff ,

into his own thought.  

> 285

Marx to F.A. sorge, 

Relationship of Bolshevism to  

> 287

rbid. , 310 .

as quoted in Rube1, ilThe   

> Marxismrr, 304. L57
> The

word rJacobinr derives from the French 

Revorution. However, for this thesis, the definition can be 

considered to refer to one who seeks to change society by 

having a minority seize state power and use it to further the revolution on the people's beharf. There is, however, a

link between the French Jacobins and the Russian Jacobins. 

That link is their phirosophy of utopian perfectionisrn.  

> They

both believed that the means existed to bring mankind 

to a new level of happiness and well-being.288 Albert Mathiez, in his book, Le Borchevisme et re Jaeobinisme, said 

the following in L92o on the similarities between the French 

Jacobins and the Russian Bolsheviks: 

History never repeats itserf exactry. But the  

> resemblances

that our analysis has shown to exist between the two great crises of L793 and L}LT are 

neither superficial nor casuar. The Russian 

revolutionaries copy their French prototypes 

voluntarily and knowingly. They are aniiritea by the same spirit. . Times differ; civilization has  

> marched

on for a century and a quarter. But because 

of its backwardness, Rulsia res6mbles illiterate, agriculturar eighteenth-century France more than is generally believed, rt wirt be interesting to observe, and rich material for reflectionl i-r tn" rhythn of the two revolutions follows the same beat 

until the end.28e 

The best known Russian Jacobins incrude Zaichnevsky, 

Tkachev, and Nechaev. They are all characterized by a

driving wirl to sej-ze power and institute revolution from 

> 288

of Sovi-et 

> 289
> Bolshevism

Willian Henry  

> Communisntt

in 

as taken from 

to Marxismtt, 

Chamberlin, rrThe Jacobin Ancestry  

> The

Russian Review. L7, 1959 , 253. 

Rubel, rrThe relationship of 

> 314. 158

above. Fanaticism is their trademark. According to Bonch-

Bruyevich, Lenin read, 

Itwith he greatest care and attentionrf Tkachev's 

Nabat, the journal Obshchina, and Nechaevrs 

proclamations, Ers werl as other revorutionary panphlets. Lenin was most interested in rkalhev and 

highty reconmended the rrrich literature of this original writerrr to his fo1lowers.2e0 

Lenin was heavily infruenced by the Russian Jacobins. He 

did not accept a two-stage theory of revolution; that is a

bourgeois revorution and then a sociar revolution. He 

berieved that Russia was ready for the kind of revorution 

that Marx envisaged in the cornmunist Manifesto.2el This  

> was

undoubtedry due to the influence of Tkachev and his theory of rrskipping stagesr. Berdyaev saw Lenin as a

recipient of the messianic and Jacobin tradition of Russian 

history. He wrote that Lenin, 

united in himself traits of chernyshevsky, Nechaev, 

Tkachev, Zhelyabov, with traits oi tne eland princes 

of Moscow, of peteq^the Great and Russian rurers of the despotic typ".2ot 

Lenin was obviously influenced by these Russian thinkers  

> when

he deternined, that for him, the fundamental aspect of 

Marxts teachings on the state was that ,the working crass 

must destroy, smash, exprode the entire state  

> 2eo

Theen, Lenin, 76.  

> 2e1

rbid. , 85.  

> 292

Berdyaev, The origins of Communism, l-15. 159  

> machinen.2e3

Lenin did not mean arr states, but was 

concerned only with the Russian state and the Russian 

revolution- His concern was not the emancipation of nankind, but the politicar emancipation of Russia from the 

Tsarist yoke. 

Lenin and Marx did not differ alr that much with respect to the notion of class. However, as previousry 

mentioned, Lenin had to deal with the Russian popuration, and its majority of peasants. Here he built upon Marx by 

adopting some of chernyshevsky's ideas. However, the fact 

remains that Marx believed in the masses', the 

proretariatst, abirity to emancipate themserves from 

bourgeois society. However, Lenin did not berieve the  

> masses

wourd develop anything other than ,trade-union 

consciousness, on their own. rn Tkachevrs words, ,Taken as 

a whole the masses do not and cannot believe in their own 

strength. They will never on their own initiative begin to  

> f

iqht against the misery that surrounds them.,,2e4 Lenin 

believed that the Russian masses courd not emancipate 

themserves from the Russian autocrati-c society.  

> The

biggest differences between Lenin and Marx are 

with respect to the nature of the revolution and the   

> 2e3 Stephen

F. Cohen, rBukharin, Lenin and the Theoretical Foundations of bolshevisrn", i" s""i"i ii"ai"=. 21,(4), April t97O, 456.  

> 2e4

Tkachev, as quoted in Venturi, Roots of Revolution, 4O2. 150 

revolutionary party. Lenin altered Marx and changed the  

> emphasis

from the emancipation of a class of society to the emancipation of the rrtoilerstr of Russian Society. Here 

again, one can see the difference between calling for human 

emancipation versus calting for political emancipation.  

> Marx

wrote of the inevitability of the revolution. Lenin 

wrote of the rnaking of the revolution. His preoccupation 

with the destruction of the Tsarist state is a result of the 

influence of Nechaev who wrote in rrPrinciples of 

RevolutioDtt, that, ttWs must devote ourselves wholly to destruction, constant, ceaseless, relentless, until there is 

nothing left of existing institutions. t'2e5 

For Marx, the revolutionary party, the Comrnunists,  

> hrere

simply the most advanced segTment of the working class.  

> They

would help to raise the consciousness of the rest of 

the proletariat. However, Lenin, following the teachings of 

Chernyshevsky, Tkachev and Nechaev formulated the notion of 

the professional revolutionary. The most important traits of a revolutionary were dedication and obedience. For 

Lenin, the origin of a revolutionary was not important as 

Iong as they would obey the rule of the party, and of Lenin. 

This differs greatly from Marxism, where the proletariat 

emancipate themselves from bourgeois society.   

> 295 Nechaev,

as quoted in Yarmolinsky, Road to Revolution, t52. 161  

> The

differences between Lenin and Marx can be  

> summarized

as a difference in |tmomentsrr. Marx was concerned 

with the inevitable historieal emancipation of the 

proletariat, from the bourgeois society which had created 

them, and thus, with the emancipation of all men. On the 

other hand, Lenin was concerned with his noment of bistory. 

That is, Lenin was concerned with Russia of the late 18OO's 

and early 19OO's. What he sought was the liberation of this society, from Tsarist autocracy. Lenin was able to mask his 

ideas under a Marxian facade, but the differences, once out 

in the open, become virtually unmaskable. 

This thesis has exarnined the differences in Lenin,s  

> and

Marx's thought with respect to class, the party, and the 

revolution. The differences between them are not minor.  

> Marxisrn

offered hope to the Russian revolutionaries in the 

Iate 1800's. They had seen the peasants as a revolutionary, 

and naturally socialist class. However, these hopes were   

> dashed when

pilgrirnages to educate the people, and terrorist acts, all failed to incite the peasantry into action. Lenin 

married the Marxian conception of a focused revolutionary 

class, the proletariat, to Russian revolutionary theory and 

the Russian revolutionary situation. In this wdy, Lenin was 

able to rrseizerr the leadership of the Russian revolutionary 

situation. Lenin, learning from Tkachevts and Nechaevrs 

mistakes, did not openly profess his views as rrJacobinrr. He  

> was

able to use Marxian language, such as the dictatorship L62 

of the proletariat, to mask his Jacobin tactics. Lenin 

sirnply fused Marxism with his own revolutionary tradition' 

Lenin was not a rrMarxistrr. He was a rrRussianrr WhO used 

Marxism as it applied to his needs. He was, ds Karl Radek 

stated, rrThe wiII to Revolutionrr' 153  

> APPENDIX

I

A PROGRAITI OF REVOIJUTIONARY ACTTON 

As Taken from Pomper, Sergei Nechaev, 55-59.  

> We

cannot fail to recognize that the chief reason 

for the misery of our society issues frorn its bad economic 

structure, perrnitting and legitirnating the doninance of the 

strong over the weak, the parasitism of the capitalist on 

the exhausted worker. Some work from early morning until late at night and receive for it a miserly wage, 

insufficient to support them and to restore their wasted 

energy. Instead of clothes they have filthy, pitiful rags, 

instead of a dwelling-some kind of repulsive kennel, a danp, 

stinking cellar, and even this only in the happy event that 

they have work. And what are the others doing all the 

while-those upon whom they depend for work, and consequently 

for their existence? They gather up from them the entire 

product of their labour, leaving then only the bare 

essentials to sustain their hungry and cold existence. In 

order to avoid this irksorne task of collecting, they hire  

> managfers,

foreman, etc., etc., and for this doTce tariente they are afforded every possible comfort and consideration.  

> The more

developed among them use the money taken from 

peasants and craftsmen to encourage the fine arts and 

literature, or they deplore the sad fate of the paupers and  

> engage

in petty charity. If you reflect about what's around 

you, it must seem like a kingdorn of the insane-so strange and unnatural are the mutual relations of people, so strange 

and incomprehensible their placid attitude in the face of a 

> mass

of filth, meanness, and injustice which issues from our 

social structure. You steal and consider yourself honest, 

you give the person you've robbed of hundreds some kind of 

pittance and sincerely consider yourself his benefactor. 

This goes beyond naivet6-it's insanj-ty. But how are we to 

understand that such things are considered normal by those  

> who

have been robbed themselves? Such an arrangement can't 

continue forever. The narod will realize that right and 

night are on its side, and then they will be victorious. This outcorne is inevitable. Everything we do must hasten 

it, by explaining to the narod its strength, the necessity 

of unification and revolt. 

The fuI1 freedom of the rejuvenated personality lies in social revolution. only a radical reconstruction of 

absurd and unjust social relations can give people enduring and genuine happiness. But it is inpossible to achieve this 

under the present political structure because it is in the 

interest of the existing power to prevent it by aI1 possible 

measures, and as is known, the authorities possess aII 

possible means for this purpose. Therefore, ds long as the 

present political structure of society exists, economic 

reforms are irnpossible, and the only way out-is political L64 

revolution, the annihilation of the nesting places.of the 

-*i=tittg power, a reform o f the state. Thus, social 

revolutio-n-is our final goal. In order to make use of this  

> means,

to apply it to the cause, we already have methods 

r"if."a out iir Ln" ftittory of previous revolutions. I t is 

up to us to apprehend them consciouslY, that is to grasp 

that since thay are phenomena repeating in history one must 

recognize the iistor-ical law and, not waiting for this law 

Lo.fp".r in all of its fullness by.virtue of time and 

circirinstance, which is inevitable-lince all things occur in  

> due

course-to hasten this development, prepare it, try to affect minds in such a way that this development would not be unexpected for thern and tney would act consciously, dS 

calmly ls possible, and not under the influence of passion, 

their eyes bloodshot. Of course, many years have intervened  

> between

earlier revolutions and our era, many changes have 

occurred, and consequently the rnethods must necessarily be 

modified and adjusted to the present tirne, but all the same 

a law is a law, and we may modify methods, introduce ner,f 

principles into them, but we cannot ignore them' we must try to create the greatest possible.number 

of revolutionary types, to develop in society consciousness 

of the necessity anb possibitity of revolution as the only  

> means

for achieiing the best order of things, and carefully construct a revolutionary organization. 

In order to achieve this we must distribute certain 

types of proclamations in a certain spirit, arrange skhodki 

.i-ti p"t=oirat protests as preliminary probesr ds a practical  

> method

for deieloping revolutionary types and for separating 

from the masses the iypes which are already developgd, 

finally, ds a method ior bringing together both individuals   

> and numerous

but uncoordinated circlesl recruit people and 

form everlnnrhere privahe kruzhki with the same direction and 

the very same single goal-revolution; set up kassy toward 

the forination of i revotutionary fund; try to enter into relations with European revolutionary organizations and 

maintain constant ties with them. We must infuse into our 

organization those social-economic principles, which wiII be 

at the bases of the future state and political order. The 

organization must be established according to the spirit of 

de6entralization and on the law of rnobi-1ity, that is, its    

> rnembers must move

from place to p]ace, that is, after a

certain time move from one place to another, which is   

> necessary because

the activity in various places calls for it, and Lhe organization at first will not be in any 

condition to send separate agents to every locality, and  

> because

this kind of activity maintained constantly by the  

> same

person in one place will undoubtedly attract too much 

publi-c notice and place the agent in a dangerous.position, 

iorm which follows inevitably, the authorities h/ill make it 

impossible for him to act. It is decentralization in the  

> sense

of a weakening of the rnain center and the allocation 155 

of a great deal of initiative to the activities of 

provincial centers. Then, those entering the organization 

must renounce property, studies, farnily ties, insofar as the 

latter (fanily and studies) rnight irnpede the activities of 

the members-to demand total renunciation of them the 

organization cannot, since this wourd restrict without need 

or cause individual freedom, which is incompatibre with an 

organization base d upon rational principlel. untir May the 

activity of the best peopte must be concentrated in 

Petersburg and Moscow, and also in part in other university cities. At this tine a protest of university students and 

those of other institutions of higher education for the 

right, to have official skhodki rnuit be prepared and 

completed; and simultaneously the principre of propaganda  

> must

be appried to the poor by the very same poor-it-forrows that an organization must be formed from the poor. 

BeginTing.in May activity rnust be transferred to provincial  

> and

district towns and concentrated mainry arnong Lhe 

raznochintsy [roughry educated commonersl, seminarists and 

provincial poor, etc. Beginning in October all of the 

forces of provinciar activity and activity concentrated in the capitars by propagandists must be intioduced into the 

nilieu of the narod itserf (which is difficurt in the sunmer  

> because

of the heavy working season). Therefore, in october 

at least three-fourths of the active workers must move from 

the capitals to the provinces, toward the western border, to 

Dinaburg-an important route for ernigration, and thus the 

preparation of the area around this route has special 

significance. From May untir september no more than one-

fourth of the mernbers wiII remain in the capital. speciarists from among the best writers on Lhe sociar and 

naturar sciences must be among them. Before september, they must define in detail the structure and rules oi tne Russiair 

revolutionary organization, create a catechism, the rures of 

which must be observed by everyone entering into direct rerations with the organization; define the activity of the 

center and the provinces, the rnethods and everything 

rerevant to the creation of particular protest- (of course, 

theoretically) in the mass of peopre in 1870r dS welr as the 

rules for agricurturar and artisansr associations; provide 

instruction in other methods of recruitrnent; creaie the form 

of the future state structure and define the tine of 

revolutj-on. rn october members from all of the provinces must assembre, and all off the probrems that have been 

theoretically sorved must be discussed and accepted by a

najority. From this moment the organization rnuit beg-in 

systematic revolutionary activity embraci-ng arl of Russia. 

NB- The compositi-on of the forrn in which the future state structure will be organized must occur with the  

> agreement

of revolutionaries abroad and consequentry a 

> systern

of foreign correspondence wirr be crea€ed. rhe best 

time for the uprising is-the spring of 1870, because in this t_66 

year many serious and imrnediate problems will be confronting the narod, and because in the evLnt that the uprising fairs in the central areas, the sunmer period will u! tavorlrabre 

for a separate war arong the vorql and Dneper and for the concearment of large masses of the narod in tne forests. The major condition which the members of the organization must observe is to avoid diffusing themselves tirough murtifaceted activities, and once having taken up tfre cause, 

to push aside everything not rerevant t5 it, to Lxpend al1 of their means and al1 of their tine, insofar as their material resources perrnit, since at trris time the 

organization is not able for provide material security for its members, and consequentryl tney must ""p."a-"-""it"i" amount of time_on the acquisition -of the means to rive, if they aren't able to get private stipends or haven't their own resources-L67  

> APPENDIX

TI 

As taken from payne, The Life and Death of Lenin, pp 24-29.  

> The

Duties of the Revorutionary toward ninself 1- The revorutionary is a doomed man. He has no personar interests, no businlss affairs, no-ernotions, Do attachments, no property and no name. Ev-erything in hirn is wnoiiy absorbed in the singre thought ana €he =i"gr"-pu=Jii" r", revolution. 2- The revorutionary knows that int he very depths of his bgrttg, not onry in words but also in deeds, he has broken all the bonds which tie hin to the social order and the civirized world with all its laws, *oiurities and customs and with alr its generally accepted conventions. He is their.impracapl".enemy, aira :.r it" ""rriir.r"s to rive with then it is onry in order to destr"v [n"r more speediry. 

3. The revorutionary despises a1r doctrines and refuses to accept the mundane sciences, reaving ttrem for future generations. He knows only one sci6nce: the science of destruction. For this reason, but only for this reason, he ril+ study rnechanics, physics; ;h;ri;ri", and perhaps medicine. Bur all aay-aira ali ;i;h;-;; srudies the vitar sciences of hunan beings, their "f,""u"i.ristics and circumstances, and alr-the phenomena of the present social order. The object is perpeluarry the =uro": the surest and quickest way of aestrolrin| tne w[ro1e filthy order. 

4. The revolutionary- despises all public opinj-on. He despi-ses and hates Lhe e-xisting ="iiii-rnorality in arl its manifestations.. - For lir, moraiity i=-".r"rything which contributes to the- triumpn of the revorution. rmmorar and criminal is everything tirat stands in it= ,.y. 5. The revolutionary is a dedicated man, rnerciless toward the state and towara the educated classes; and he can expect no mercy form them. Between him and thern there exists, declared or concealed, a relentless .rra-irreconcilable war to the death- He musi accustom himself to torture. 6- Tyrannicar toward hirnself, he must be tyrannical toward others- Arl the gentle and "n.rn.iing-sentiments of kinship, 1ove,. friendship, gratitud" J.ra even honour must be suppressed in hin and give ptace to tne cold and singre-ninded passion for rev5rution. For him there exists onry one pleasure, one consolation, one reward, one satisfaction-the success of the revorution. llignt irra a.y he must have but one thought, one aim-mercires=-a"=ir"cti6n. siiivinq 168 

coldbloodedly and indefatigably toward this end, he rnust be 

pi"pir"a to iestroy hinseli and to destroy \^/ith lis. own  

> ir"tt-a=

everything tirat stands in the path of revolution' 7. The nature of the true revolutionary excludes all =""ii*""-ality, romanticism, infatuation and exaltation' aff private hltred and revenge must also be excluded. 

n"voiutionary passion, practice at every moment of the day 

until it becornls a haLit, is to be employed with cold 

calculation. At all times and in all places the 

revolutionary must obey, not his personal irnpulses, but only 

those which lerve the cause of the revolution'  

> The

Relations of the Revolutionary toward his Conrades 

8. The revolutionary can have no friendship of attachrnent 

except for those who have proved by their actions that they, 

Iike him, are dedicated to revolution. The degree of 

iii""a=ni-p, devotion and obligation toward such a comrade is 

determine-ct'solely by the degree of his usefulness to the  

> cause

of total revolutionary destruction' 

9. It is superfluous to speak of solidarity among 

revolutionaiies. The whole strength of revolutionary work 

ti"= in this. Comrades who possess the same revolutionary 

passion and understanding should, ds much as possible, 

beliberate all important matters together and come to  

> unanirnous

conclusions. When the plan is finally decided 

upon, then the revolutionary mus! rely solely on himself. 

l-n carrying out acts of destruction each one should act 

alone, never running to another for advice and assistance 

"xc"pi when these are necessary for the furtherance of the 

plan. 

10. AIl revolutionaries should have under them second- or 

third-degree revolutionaries-i.e., comrades who are not 

cornpleteiy initiated. These should be regarded-as part of 

the common revolutionary capital placed at his disposal. 

This capital should, of-course, be spent as econornically as 

possiffl in order to derive from it the greatest possible 

irofit. The real revolutionary should regard hinself as 

Lapital consecrated to the triurnph of the revolution; 

hoilever, h€ rnay not personally and alone dispose of .that -.lit.f 'withoul the irnanirnous-consent of the fully initiated 

> comrades.

11. When a comrade is in danger and the question arises 

whether he should be saved or not saved, the decision must 

not f" arrived at on the basis of sentiment, but solely in the interests of the revolutionary cause. Therefore it is  

> necessary

to weigh carefully the usefulness of the comrade 169 

against the expenditure of revolutionary forces necessary to  

> save

him, and the decision must be made accordingly.  

> The

Relations of tbe Revolutionary toward Society 

L2. The new mernber, having given proof of his loyalty not by  

> words

but by deeds can be received into the society only by 

the unanimous agreement of all the members. 

13. The revolutionary enters the world of the state' of the 

privileged classes, of the so-called civilization, and he 

lives in this world only for the purpose of bringing about 

its speedy and total destruction. He is not a revolutionary 

if he has any sympathy for this world. He should not 

hesitate to destroy any position, any p1ace, ot any man in this world. He must hate everyone and everything in it with 

an equal hatred. AII the worse for him if he has any 

relations with parents, friends or lovers; he is no longer a

revolutionary if he is swayed by these relationships. 14. Airning at implacable revolution, the revolutionary nay 

and frequently must live within society while pretending to 

be completely different from what he really is, for he must 

penetrate everywhere, into all the higher and middle 

classes, into the houses of commerce, the churches and the 

palaces of the aristocrdcy, and into the worlds of the bureaucracy and literature and the military, and also into the Third Division and the Winter Palace of the Tsar. 

15. This filthy social order can be split up into several 

categories. The first category comprises those who must be  

> condernned

to death without delay. Comrades should compile a

tist of those to be condemned according to the gravity of 

their crimes; and the executions should be carried out 

according to the prepared order. 

16. When a list of those who are condemned is made and the 

order of execution is prepared, not private sense of outrage 

should be considered, nor is it necessary to pay attention to the hatred provoked by these people among the comrades or 

the people. Hatred and the sense of outrage may even be 

useful in so far as they incite the masses to revolt. It is  

> necessary

to be guided only by the relative usefulness of these executions for the sake of the revolution. Above aII, 

those who are especially ininical to the revolutionary organization rnust by destroyed; their violent and sudden 

deaths will produce the utmost panic in the government, 

depriving it of its wiII to action by rernoving the cleverest  

> and

most energetic supporters. L70 

L7. The second group comprises those who will be spared for the time being in order that, by a series of monstrous acts, 

they may drive the people into inevitable revolt. 18. The third category consists of a great many brutes in high positions distinguished neither by their cleverness 

nor their energy, while enjoying riches, influence, power 

and high positions by virtue of their rank. These must be 

exploited in every possible way; they must be inplicated and 

embroiled in our affairs, their dirty secrets must be 

ferreted out, and they must be transformed into slaves. 

Their power, influence and connections, their wealth and 

their energy will form an inexhaustible treasure and a

precious help in all our undertakings. 

19. The fourth category comprises ambitious officeholders 

and liberals of various shades of opinion. The 

revolutionary must pretend to corraborate with them, blindly following them, while at the same time prying out their 

secrets until they are completely in his power. They must 

be so compromised that there is no way out for them, and 

then they can be used to create disorder in the state. 

20. The fifth category consists of those doctrinaires, 

conspirators and revolutionists who cut a great figure on 

paper or in their cliques. They must be constantly driven 

on to make comprornising declarations: as a result the 

rnajority of them will be destroyed, while a minority wiII  

> become

genuine revolutionaries. 2L. The sixth category is especially important: women. They 

can be divided into three main groups. First, those 

frivolous, thoughtless and vapid women, whom we sha11 use 

as we use the third and fourth category of men. Second,   

> vtomen who

are ardent, capable and devoted, but who do not belong to us because they have not yet achieved a

passionress and austere revolutionary understanding; these 

must be used Like the men of the fifth category. Finally, there are the women who are completely on our side-i.e., 

those who are wholly dedicated and who have accepted our 

program in its entirety. We should regard these women as 

the most valuabre of our treasuresl without their help we 

would never succeed.  

> The

Attitude of the Society toward the people 

22. The Society has no aim other than the cornplete 

liberation and happiness of the masses-i.e., of the  

> who

live my manual labour. Convinced that their 

ernancipation and the achievement for this happiness  

> come

about as a result of an all-destroying popular 

> people

can only 

revolt, L7T 

the society wirl use all its resources and energy toward 

increasing and intensifying the evils and niseriLs of the people untir at last their patience is exhausted and they 

are driven to a general uprising. 

23. By a revolution the society does not mean an orderly 

revolt according to the classic western moder-a revott wnicn 

always stops short of attacking the rights of property and 

the traditional social systems of so cillea civirizatl-on and 

morarity. until now such a revolution has arways rimited 

itself to the overthrow of one politicar form in order to 

reprace it by another, thereby ittempting to bring about a

so-called revorutionary state. The only form of ievolution beneficiar to the people is one which destroys the entire state to the roots and exterminates all the state 

traditions, institutions and classes in Russia. 

24. with this end in view, the society therefore refuses to  

> impose

any new organization from above. Any future 

organization will doubtless work its way thiough the  

> movement

and life of the peopre; but this is a matter for future generations to decide. our task is terribre, total, universal and merciless destruction. 

25. Therefore, in drawing closer to the people, we must  

> above

arl make conmon cause with those elemLnts of the  

> masses

which, since the foundation of the state of Muscowy,  

> have

never ceased to protest, not only in words but in 

d9eds, against everything directry or- indirectry connected 

with the state: against the nobirity, the bureaircrdcy, the 

clergy, the traders, and the parasilic kuraks. we nirst 

unite with the adventurous tribes of brigands, who are the 

only genuine revolutionaries of Russia. 

26. To weld the people into one single unconquerabl_e and 

arr-destructive force-this is our aim, our conspiracy and 

our task. L72 

Berinsky, Vissarion--a riterary critic in the rnid-tgoo,s.  

> He

belonged to the westerner croup in opposition to the Slavophiles. His writings were eltremeilr critical of the exislirg sociar and poritical conditions. Arthough he died in the 184ors, rnlny of his ideas were espoused 

by the young radicars and inew menr of the 1g6o's. 

Berdyaev, Nicolas--a revorutionary and writer. His beliefs were based in rerigion. A one-time rMarxist, and later supporter of the Russian 1ibera1s. 

Bernstein, Eduard--German socialist and executor to Engers 

estate. shocked orthodox socialists by proposing-najor 

revisions to Marxist theory. 

Burgakov, sergei--writer and professor. A one-time Russian Marxist who later became a priest in rgi-7. -wnir" still a revolutionary he became a- cri-tic of Marxism al0ng with others such as Struve and Berdyaev. 

careyr- An American Economist who advocated the harmony of crass interests. He used the united states as an  

> example

of a situation where all crasses prospered. He  

> was

vehemently denounced by Chernyshevsky'. 

cherkezov, Aleksandr--owner of bookstore in Moscow which served as a center of.revolutionary activity. Nechaev's activities in Moscow wer6 based at, nis bookstore. cherkezov was a one-time member of rshutin's.organization and later escaped siberian exire to work with Lavrov in London. 

Dolgov, Nikorai--Mernber of Nechaev's first circl_e of the Peoplers Revenge(or Vengeance). Later became an 

sociarist Revolutionary. He possibly had some 

influence on Lenin's p6riod iir xizin. 

Gusev, s.r.--one-time secretary of the st. petersburg 

committee of the RSDRp. A prorninent Borshevik and 

founding member. 

rvanovrrvan--member of Nechaevrs first circre of the Peoprets Revenge. Attended the petrov Academy and was 

in. charge of recruiting for Nechaevrs group tireie. Later was murdered by Nechaev and theii ciicre ior not completely subordinating to Nechaevrs wiII. 

Karakazov, Dmitrii--Tried to assassinate the Tsar on April 4th, 1866. Rereased a wave of reaction xnown as tne rrWhite Terrorr. L73 

Khalturin, Stepan N.--A young revolutionary held in high  

> esteem

by Lenin. He was executed in 1882 for the 

assassination of General Strelnikov, the rnilitary procurator of Odessa. He also attempted to blow up the 

Tsar in the Winter Palace in 1880 but failed. He was 

direet in his approach, planning and execution. For 

Lenin he was a perfect revolutionary. 

Kucherov-- A biographer of Chernyshevsky. He was 

particularly concerned with Chernyshevskyts economic 

views. 

Kuznetsov, Aleksei--A member of Nechaevrs circle in the Peoplets Revenqe. He was a student at the Petrov    

> Academy and Nechaev

assigned hin to stirring up 

discontent in the merchant community. He supplied 

funds, from his wealthy fanily, for Nechaev's escapades. 

Lopatin, German--A young Russian revolutionary who tried to 

rescue Chernyshevsky frorn Siberia but failed. He later set himself to the task of uncovering the truth about  

> Nechaev

and the murder of lvanov. He was responsible 

for the downfall of Nechaev among the non-Jacobin 

revolutionary conmunity. 

Martov,- A leading Russian Marxist. One of the original editors of Iskra and one-time colleague of Leninrs. 

Considered by many to be on par with Lenin. Later  

> became

a prominent Menshevik. 

Ogarev, Nicholas--A Russian emigre. Held in high esteem by many revolutionaries. First as a colleague of Herzen 

and then as a colleague of Bakunin and through hirn, 

Nechaev. Collaborated with Bakunin and Nechaev in releasing a series of proclamations. Pavlovna, Vera--The main character in Chernyshevskyrs What 

is To Be Done?. In the novel she has a nurnber of  

> dreams

which illustrate the way things should be, that is, socialisn. 

Postnikov, V.E.- Released a book in the winter of IggL-92 on 

the rural conditions in Southern Russia. In it, he 

illustrated that the Russian village was undergoing 

class transformation as the wealthy villagers exploited 

the smaller and weaker villagers. 

Potresov, A.N.--A leading Russian Marxist. An original  

> member

of Iskra's editorial staff and a prominent 

revolutionary. ]-74 

Pryzhov, Ivan G.--member of Nechaevrs circle. Was a poor  

> member

of the lesser nobility. His most famous book  

> was The

Historv of Taverns in Russia. He was easily 

manipurated by Nechaev and played a part in the murder 

of fvanov.  

> Rakhmetov--A

fringe character in Chernyshevskyrs What is To  

> Be

Done?. He is the example of the new menl strong and 

dedicated only to the revorution. Many young Russian  

> men

got sick trying to irnitate Rakhmetov by eating raw 

beef in large quantities. 

Ripman, Fedor--a member of Nechaevts first circre of The 

Society.of the People's Revenge. He was in charge of 

recruiting useful members of the population, the 

underworld. 

speranskii, M.M.- Responsibre for codifying the Russian raws 

in the early 1800's. However, his reiorns did littre for the conmon man, who stirl was unable to get equal 

justice. 

Stakhevich, S.G.- A young revolutionary who became 

acquainted with chernyshevsky during a siberian exire.  

> He

had a number of conversat-ions witn chernyshevsky 

which have been recounted in his memoirs. 

struve, Petr--An early Russian Marxist who later became a

Russian liberar. once a colraborator with Lenin, but 

Lenin eventualJ-y broke with this ttphilistinen. 

Responsibre for drawing up the first Manifesto of the 

> RSDLP.

Tugan-Baranovskii, M.r.--A Russian revorutionary who was  

> known

as a social dernocratic econornist. He was a

leading member of the Legal Marxists. Many youngl men 

of the 1890s learned their Marxism from the rikes of 

struve and himself, rather than frorn plekhanov and the 

older Marxists. He would, like Struve, eventually 

> abandon Marxism.

uspensky, Petr--a Russian revolutionary and corleague of 

Nechaev's. Helped Nechaev start hi-s first ciicle in  

> Moscow

and aided in the murder of rvanov. He was later 

rnistakenly hanged as a spy by fe11ow exiles in siberia. valentinov, Nikolay(N.v. Volsky) --Russian revolutionary and 

author of Encounters with Lenin. once part of Leninrs 

circre of followers in Geneva but broke with him due to 

the influences of Bulgakov and Tugan-Baranovskii. L75 

zasulich, vera--Embroiled in Nechaev mystique by receiving 

the letter describing his dramatic ,escape,r from peter 

and Paul Fortress. Later she became famous for 

shooting Trepov, the military governor of petersburg. 

Eventualry, she became a Marxist and died a Menshevir. 

zheliabov, Andrei rvanovich--a member of the peoprers wirl  

> who

assassinated Alexander II in March, 1991. A

leading conspiratorial terrorist whom Lenin greatry  

> adrnired. SELECTED BTBLTOGRAPHY

Adams, Arthur 8., editor. The Russian Revorution and 

. Toronto: 

D.C. Heath and Compdny, t972. 

Ascher, Abraham. 

> Menshevism. L972.

Inc., 

Pavgl.Axelrod and the Developrnent of 

Canbridge: Harvard univeiEiEy-FG, 

_---._ The Menshevilss in the Russian Revolution. 

London: Thames and Hudson, Lg76. 

Baron, Samuel H. 

Marxism. Stanford: St 1963. 

Bender, Frederi-c L., editor. The Betrayar of Marx. New 

York: Harper and Row, ITTS 

Berdyaev, Nikolai. . Ann 

Arbor: University of Micniqan press, 1960. 

Tbe End of Our Tine. New york: Sheed and Ward 

> 1933.

. The Russian rdea. Boston: Beacon press, ].962. 

Berlin, rsiah. Russian Thinkers. Toronto: crarke, rrwin and Company Ltd., Lg7B. 

Bernstein, Samuel. 

rnsurrection. London: r,awr@tg7r. 

Billington, James H. 

oxford: ClarendoilGss, 1958 .

Bottomore, T.B. and Rubel, Maximilien, editors. Karl Marx: 

Markham: penguin Books Caffi  

> Bowrnan,

Herber! T. in the origills ot 

Carnbridge: Harvard univeiEityEess , rg54. 

CarrEre DtBncausse, H61Ene.  

> New

york: Longman, L9gZ. 

> a
> T76 L77

Chernyshevsky, N.G. . Moscow: Foreign Languages r@ r_953. 

What is to be Done. 

Christoff, peter K. 

. The Haque: Mouton, L97O. 

Fernbach, editor and translator. @rnternational and After. r,onao@ooks Ltd., L974. 

Freeborn, Richard. 

Turgenev to Pasternak. New i@iversity Press, L992. 

Gleason, Abbott.. 

: The Viking press, 

> 1980.

Haimson, Leopold H: 

Bolshevism. CarnbridgE: H.r,ra@, 1955. 

Hardyr Deborah. .

seattle: university o--waEningt"n press , t977. 

Keep, J.L.H. .

Oxford: Clarendon prGss , 1-963 

Larnpert, Evgeni. 

Oxford: Clarendon eress, Leatherbarrow, W.J., and Offord, D.C., translators and editors. 

> L987.

Leninr V.I. .

Languages press, L976. Peking: Foreign 

:__-. . New York: fnternational @

. ...= rq>+:; crr cne ProJ_et,aFlat j 

London: Martin f,awreffi 

---l: @. New York: rnternational Publishers, L969 L78 

. Thg Teachings of KarI Marx. New york: 

International publishers, Lg37. Luxemburgr, Rosa. thg Russian Revolu 

Marxism. Toronto: Ambassaaor 

Malia, Martin. 

## sociarisn. llew voikl--EGset anaffi 

Marx, Karl. . Moscow: 

Progress publishers, lg77 Mat1aw, Ralph, editor. 

Pgtrfol.rnUo.rt S"I""t ton, t962. 

Nahirny, Vladinir.C. 

Torment to sirence. New grunswick: T;6;action Books, 1983. Nomad, Max. Apostres of Revorution: Boston: Little Brown, and Companyrlg:g. 

offord, Derek. th. *r==iun= *grotrtig.urr tor"r.ra ,, an" 1880ts. New york, Cambria ee. 

Page, Stanley l{. Praqmatist. St. Louis: Forum press, Lg77. 

Payne, Robert.. . New york: Sirnon and Schuster, 1964. 

Pipes, Richard A., edi-tor. The Russian rntelrigentsia. New york: columbia university-FieEEJs6:-.. 

, editor. Revolutionary Russia. canbridge, Harvard University press, 196g. 

Pomper' ehilip.. sergei Nechaev. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University press , Ig7g. 

Raeff, Marc.  

> New

Jersey: 

Randall, Frances 

Publishing, Hunanities press, Lg7g. 

L Twayne 

Riha, Thornas. 

B. N.G. Chernyshevskv. Boston: 

> 1967.

Chicago Press, L969. Chicago: University of L79 

Rubel, Maximirien. - Rubel on Karl Marx: Five Essays. New York: cambridge uni@19g1. 

Schapiro, Leonar_d. 

ork: Basic Books fnc., L994. Simmons, Ernest J. editor, 

and soviet Thouqht. camur.iagfl-ffivara-nIGIty Pressr 1955 

Spitzer, Alan_B. 

Auguste Blanqui. New Vorf press, 

> L957.

Theenr Rolf H.W. 

Revolutionarv. New voitcl--r_.,[!G6tt, r97 3 . 

Theorv. 

Tonpkins, Stuart l.Tguy. orman: University of Oklahona press, fgSg. 

Tucker, Robert c., editor. The Lenin Anthology. New york: W.W. Norton and ConpdDy, fgZS. 

_-_-_.- . New york: W.W. Norton and Cornpanlr, :_SZe. 

UIam, Adarn B. . New york: The Viking press, t977. 

York: Co1lier Books; 196'r. 

valentinov, uikolay (N.v. volsky). Encounters with Lenin. Toronto: oxford Universit|' preE:lg68. Venturi, Franco. 

. New 

Russia. New york: Grosset and Dunlap, fgOO. 

Von Laue, Theodore.    

> -| V <I l-

Toronto: J. B. f,ippincott Company, L97J.. 

weeks, Albert L. _ The First polshevi poriticar 

. New york: New york 

University eresE,-TsoE. 180 

Woehrlin, William F. Chernyshevskii: The Man and The 

Journalist. Cambridge: Harvard University press,  

> L97 L.

Wortman, Richard. The Crisis of Russian Populism. London: 

Canbridge University press, t967. 

Yarmolinsky, Avraham. Road to Revolution: A Century of 

Russian Radicalism. New york: Macmillan, 1959: 

Articles 

Barghoorn, Frederick c. trThe philosophical outlook of 

Chernyshevsky: Materialisrn and Utilitarianism" in Slavic Review. 6(i_8-l_9), Dec L947.. 42-56. 

chamberlin, william Henry. ,The Jacobin Ancestry of soviet  

> Communismrr,

in the Russian Review. L7, 195g: 2SL-257. 

cohen, steven F. rrBukharin, Lenin, and the Theoreticar 

Foundations of Borshevism.t in soviet studies. 2L(4), 

April 1970 z 436-458. 

Debrizzi, John A. tMarx and Lenin: Class, party, and  

> Democracyrr

in studies in soviet Thought. z+1zy , August 

L982: 95-115. 

Ehrenberg, John. rrcommunists and proletarians: Lenin on 

consciousness and spontaneityr, in studies in soviet 

Thought. 25(4) , May l-993: 285-305. 

rrlenin and the Politics of organizationtt in   

> 43 (1)

, Spring 19792 70-87. Science and Society. 

Fedoseyev, Pyotr. 

heritagert in  

> 14.
> rrA

great j.nternationa 

World Marxist Review. I ideological 

26, March 1983i 7-

Frankel, Jonathan. rrMartov and Leninr, in survey. Nors 70-

7L, Winter-Spring L969t 2O2-2O6. 

rrLenin,s Early Writi in Political Studies. 

Harding, Nej-1. 

Contextrl 442-459. 

Hardy, Deborah. rrConsciousness 

Peasant Revolution seen 

Bakuninrr in 

699-720. 

ngs-The Problem of 

23(4), December 1975: 

and Spontaneity, Tkachev, Lavrov, 1875: The 

> and

Winter L97Oz . 4(41, r.81 

zs 1i1 , 

> rrTkachev

and the Marxistsr in Slavic Review. March I97Oi 22-34. 

Herler, Michael. Itl,enin and the cheka: the ReaI Leninil in Survey. 24(2), Spring L97gz L7S_L92. 

Karpovich, Michael. rrForerunner of Lenin: p.N. Tkachev, in Review of politics. 6(3), July igis: 336_3s0. 

Kingston-Mann, Esther. rrMarxism and Russian Rurar Development: probrems of Evider"", Experience ana curturetr: 11 . -ll"-ee l october 1981:73L-752. 

Leggett, G.H._ rrlenin, Terror, and, the political poricefr in Survey. 2L(4), Autumn LgTS: 157_188. 

Levine, Norman. ,Lenin's utopianismr in studies in soviet Thoucrht . 30 (2) , August f-SeS : gS_tOZ .

Lenin, v.r. 'The Historical Destiny of The Doctrine of Karl Marxt in worrd Marxist Review .'26; January r9g3 : 2-3. 

Lustig, Jeff . _ttOl Organization: The euestion of the Leninist partyrr i" .--ziif i"i"rr, 27-69. Moraes, David et al. ,The vitality of Leninrs Revolutionary Tacticsrt in zg, December 1995: 58-7 6. 

Offord, Derek.. rrDostoye,r=Il^ulg Chernyshevsky.,, in SEER. 57 (4) , October IgTg: 509-530. 

Pipes, Richard A. 'Russian Marxisrn and rts populist  

> Backgrounflrr

in Russian Review. ts1+1, 1960: 3L6-337. 

Pomper, Philip. rNechayev and Tsaricide: .The conspiracy within tl: g:l=pirisy', i" n"==ii"-i""r"r. 33(2) April L974: 123-138. 

rrBakunin, Nechaev, and the nCatechism of Revolutionaryrr: The case for Joint auinorshiprt 

# l-'-riiiii winrer 535-551. 

> a

.in 

> L9763

Resis, Albert:^.lpas Kapital comes to Russia, in Slavic Review. 29 (2) , June tgT}t 2L9_237. 

scanlan, James p. rrNikolai.chernyshevsky and the philosophy 

of Realism in Nineteenth centuiv nu==ran Aesthetics, in . 30, i_ia. L82 

shanin, Teodor. rlate Marx and the Russi-an periphery of capitarism" in Monthry Review. islzl , June 1983: r_o-23. 

Theen, Rolf H.w. 'seizure of political power as the Prologue to social Revolution, rn" political rdeas of P.N. Tkachev in the Early LSTorsi--in @Studies. 4(4) Winter 1,gZO AZO_ege. 

Tucker, Robert c. rBetween Lenin and stalin: A curtural Anarysis. tt i" 6 (4), January 1987: 462-47 6. 

wiles, Peter.'Leninism and-weltinnenpolitikrr in survey. 22(3-4) , summer-Auturnn Ig76: rsa_ie ;-.--" wohlforth, Tim. ,Transition to the Transitionrf in New Left Review. No 130:67_81.
